










































UDC 339.9 

Regional Dimensions of International  
Scientific and Technical Cooperation*  

TETIANA CHERNYTSKA1 

ABSTRACT. The article has examined a phenomenon of international scientific and 
technical cooperation within individual regions, conditions and factors of its 
formation. It has been analyzed the evolution, basic essential features, models and 
trends of development of local innovation alliances, their participation in 
international scientific and technical cooperation. It has been proposed the priorities 
of formation of a quality mechanism to improve this form of cooperation in Ukraine 
and establishment of prerequisites for its expansion with European organizational 
structures that operate in innovation field (technology parks, technology clusters, 
innovation centers, etc.). 
 
KEY WORDS: International scientific and technical cooperation, local innovation 
alliances, technology parks, science parks, business incubators, technology clusters, 
innovation strategy, regionalization, regional dimensions. 

Introduction 

The current stage of development of the world community is 
characterized by a concurrent flow of two powerful dominant processes in 
the system of interregional relations, where there is permanent 
strengthening of globalization, on the one hand, and steady growth of 
regionalization, on the other. That is to say, rather intensive processes of 
regionalization (especially internal regionalization) the driving impetus to 
which is primarily given by the decentralization of management and 
control occur along with increasing the interpenetration and 
interdependence of states and erasing of national borders. In addition, it 
should be noted that the regionalization is a form of protection of the 
interests of a certain region from the ravages of global processes. 
Transformation of some areas — regions, cities and localities — into 
strategic players of global markets requires the development and 
implementation of effective innovation strategies as the imperative of their 
competitiveness in the geo-economic space. Regional factors play an 
increasingly important role in the system of factors of international 
competitiveness of national economies, which manifests as a high 
competitive status, high-tech clusters, techno-poles, which do determine 
the dispositions of countries in the hierarchy of global competitive 
relations.  
                     

* This article was translated from its original in Ukrainian 
1 Tetiana Chernytska — PhD, Associate Professor of International Economics Department at SHEE 

«Kyiv National Economic University named after Vadym Hetman». Research interests: international 
scientific and technical cooperation, innovattion development, international competitiveness, 
international security. E-mail address: varensia@mail.ru 

IEP, № 18, (2013) pp. 100—121 
© Tetiana Chernytska, 2013 «All rights reserved» 
ISSN 1811-9832/2013/№ 1 (18) 

 



ISSN 1811-9832.INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC POLICY.2013.№ 1 (18) 95

It is worth to mention, among the scientific works which study the 
theoretical foundations of regional integration, interregional competition, 
international competitiveness of regions, models of local innovation 
alliances, the works of such foreign researchers as A. Vylyams1, R. Guo2, 
B. Gardiner, M. Porter 3, V. Price4, K. Sorensen5, Sh. Tatsuno6, 
Ye. Fedina7, R. Hadson 8, as well as domestic scholars as L. Antoniuk9, 
A. Halchynskyi10, V. Heyets11, A. Poruchnyk12, A. Filipenko13, 
V. Chuzhykov14 and others. 

Innovations are one of the determinants of the efficiency of production 
of goods and services, of their quality and therefore, of increase in 
competitiveness in the market. Increased spending on R&D, a shift of their 
significant part from the military purposes to the civilian ones, the need to 
reduce a negative impact of industrial development on a global scale 
(environmental problems) and at national level (growth of unemployment, 
worsening of social problems), economic expansion of TNC and 
aggravation of competition lead to activation and spread of international 
scientific and technical cooperation which is one of the distinctive features 
of today. Regions of many countries strive to find their place among the 
participants in this process. Therefore, research of processes of 
regionalization under the globalization in terms of formation of a regional 
innovation strategy becomes more urgent. One of the unsolved problems 
in the field of scientific and technical integration is, in our opinion, a 
problem of development of international scientific and technical 
cooperation at regional level and involvement of Ukraine's regions in 
integration processes in R&D sphere.  

                     
1 Hudson Ray, Williams Allan, Divided Europe, Society and Territory (L.: Sage, 1999), 342 р. 
2 Rongxing Guo, Border-Regional Economics: Contribution to Economics (Heidelberg: Physica 

Verlag, 1996), 231 р. 
3 Porter M.E., Competition, trans. from English, textbook (M.: Williams, 2001), 495 pp. 
4 Price Wolfgang, «The role of non-governmental organizations as an engine of change,» 

Perspectives of study No. 2 (1999): P. 24—36. 
5 Karan J. Sorensen., «Firm Characteristics: Collaborative Culture and Perceived Issues with 

University-to-Industry Knowledge Transfer,» Stevens Institute of Technology, Wesley J., Howe School 
of Technology Management, Castle Point on Hudson, Hoboken, NJ 07030 (Oct. 2006): 457 р. 

6 Tatsuno Sh., Strategy — techno-pole, trans. from English by Tatsuno Sh (Moscow: Progress, 
1989), 227 pp. 

7 Fedina E.V., «Modern directions for the development of a region, based on cluster formation,» 
E.V.Fedina, K.V. Ekimova, Development of the economy in the context of finance crisis: problems and 
prospects: coll.works of participants in Internat. scien.& practc. conf. (St. Petersburg: Polytechnic 
University, 2009), P. 53-60. 

8 Hudson Ray, Williams Allan, Divided Europe, Society and Territory (L.: Sage, 1999), 342 р. 
9 Antoniuk L.L., Poruchnyk A.M., Savchuk V.S., Innovation: theory, mechanism of development and 

commercialization: monograph (К.: KNEU, 2003), 211 pp. 
10 Halchynskyi A.S., Heyets V.M., Kinah A.K., Seminozhenko V.P., Innovation strategy of 

Ukrainian reforms (K.: Knowledge of Ukraine, 2002), 326 pp. 
11 Ibid. 
12 Poruchnyk A.M., Antoniuk L.L., Venture Capital: International Experience and Problems of 

Development in Ukraine: monograph (К.: KNEU, 2000), 356 pp. 
13 Filipenko A.S., Global forms of economic development: History and Modernity, monograph (K.: 

Knowledge, 2007), 670 pp. 
14 Chuzhykov V.I., Regional integration strategies of post-socialist countries of Europe monograph 

(K.: LLC «Kadry», 2003), 297 pp. 



TETIANA CHERNYTSKA. 
REGIONAL DIMENSIONS OF INTERNATIONAL SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL COOPERATION 

96

Theoretical principles of operation  
of local innovation alliances 

Under the current conditions, there is a very common situation with the 
lack of a possibility to use the scientific and technical factor of development 
with maximum efficiency due to its limitation by international borders, which 
is an additional incentive for international scientific and technical cooperation 
at regional level. The following Western European technology programs: 
«EUREKA», «ARIAN», «EUROBIO», «EUROROBOT» and a number of 
Framework Programs may serve as an example of its impact. The typical 
manifestation of process of globalization of scientific and technical 
development is the formation of regional and local innovation networks. 
Their key driving force is the common economic, financial, social and 
environmental interests of regions and neighboring states. This may be most 
clearly seen on the example of the European Union countries, where scientific 
and technical cooperation is carried out on a «multi-level» basis. Three main 
levels may be distinguished:  
 pan-European — in the framework of the EU programs: 

«EUREKA» (international scientific and technical cooperation on the 
basis of forming the strategic alliances), «COST» (cooperation in the field 
of research and technological development), «CERN» (the European 
Center for Nuclear Research), the European Space Agency, the European 
Bimolecular Laboratory, etc.; 
 sub-regional — the border cooperation of administrative regions of 

different countries and the extraterritorial cooperation of the regions of 
states that do not have common borders; 
 local — cooperation of territories within the same country. 
Changes in the methods of economy coordination, the rejection of strict 

control and command relationships lead to increased importance of 
territorial cooperation. In this regard, the role of local scientific and 
technical clusters (local areas of new technology development) which are 
formed on the basis of technology parks, small business incubators, 
technopoles, technology clusters and other regional (formed within 
national borders) alliances strengthens. Local innovation alliances are 
widely-spread in the United States, United Kingdom and Germany. 

Technological parks are the core of scientific and 
technological activities 

In the world practice, a variety of terms to refer to high-tech parks such 
as a science park, a technology park, a research park, etc. is introduced. 
There is a number of researchers who tend to isolate certain features of 
certain local innovation alliances. However, the common approach is to 
identify such groups as equal, and the use of different symbols depends 
primarily on a region. For example, in Germany this is a Technology Park, 



ISSN 1811-9832.INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC POLICY.2013.№ 1 (18) 97

in the United Kingdom — a Science Park, in the United States — a 
Research Park, in France and Japan — a Technopole. Existing differences 
in approaches to define technology parks cause in turn certain difficulties 
in counting their total number in the world. 

Fundamentally, technology parks are the core of scientific and 
technological activities, performing the function of locomotive of a 
region’s innovation development. The main purpose of technoparks is to 
increase the well-being of a region through creation of conditions for the 
commercialization of knowledge and technology by combining in its 
territory large technology companies and start-ups, universities and 
innovation companies, as well as by formation of an active business 
environment and creating the platforms and infrastructure for innovation 
activities. Thus, technology parks facilitate technology transfer, creation 
of jobs for highly qualified personnel with good salary, develop a culture 
of innovation and entrepreneurship. To achieve the above objectives, 
technoparks perform the following functions: 
 manage the flows of knowledge and technology between 

universities, developers, innovation companies and markets; 
 ensure that innovative companies are formed through the process of 

incubation (start-ups, spin-offs, etc.); 
 provide the full servicing of innovation activities (including 

adequate facilities and workplaces). 
It is worth to distinguish, among the distinctive features of technoparks, 

those which are crucial for innovation development: much larger return on 
investment in designs (lower cost, higher efficiency); satisfaction by an 
infrastructure of specific needs of technology companies; maximum 
research activity, concentration of developers and services. 

In those innovation alliances, the competition shifts from the rivalry of 
individual companies towards formal and informal inter-firm unions. The 
first experiment of scientific and technology park creation was the Silicon 
Valley on the basis of the science park of Stanford University in the early 
50s of last century. France was next in creating technoparks, which was 
the first in Europe when established the science park «Sophia Antipolis». 
This process came to Asia in the early 70s, Japan established the first 
Tsukuba Science City. The specified science parks are among the most 
famous ones in the world. 

It is worth to note that at the dawn of emergence of technoparks in the 
Soviet Union in 1956 it was created the Novosibirsk Scientific City — 
Akademgorodok, which innovation infrastructure was consistent with the 
current principles. It was after visiting by American journalists in 1971 the 
so-called «Golden Valley» in Akademgorodok that the Stanford 
University-based science park was named as «Silicon Valley». 

A striking example of a successful technology park can be the world-
renowned Cambridge Science Park in the United Kingdom, which was 
founded in 1970 and started functioning in 1975. This park was created in 



TETIANA CHERNYTSKA. 
REGIONAL DIMENSIONS OF INTERNATIONAL SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL COOPERATION 

98

response to the government's intention to strengthen the relations between 
the academic research and innovation industry. The Trinity College 
presented in the history of science by the world-famous names of Newton, 
Maxwell, Rayleigh, Thompson, Breggoff, Rutherford and many other 
eminent scientists directly performed work on implementation of the 
science park project. In the park, there are more than 60 companies, some 
of which are small high-tech businesses established by employees of the 
Cambridge University or those originating from it. The rest of them 
represent the branches of large industrial companies, including the foreign 
ones. Their interest is dictated by the desire to «have a keen sense of the 
pulse» of scientific and technology development, thereby cutting down the 
way for new ideas from laboratories to production. 

Experience of the Cambridge Science Park was quickly adopted by other 
university centers and regions of the United Kingdom. As early as in 1984, 
the first eight science parks established the UK Science Parks Association. 
Today the association includes more than 50 science parks, most of which 
have a narrow specialization. The most common areas of specialization, 
according to the Association, are to conduct scientific research and to develop 
new products as well as to render consultation services. 

The global process of creating technoparks reached the most rapid 
development in the second half of 80s of last century. At that time, according 
to data of the International Association of Science Parks (IASP), it was 
created 23.38 per cent of all technology parks. The idea of science park 
formation quickly spread around the world: technoparks began to form in 
Canada, Japan, Singapore, Australia, Brazil, India, Malaysia, China1. 

 

Fig. 1. Dynamics of share of the newly established technoparks  
in the total number of technoparks in the world 2 

                     
1 IASP worldwide statistics on STPs, 2006 — 2010. [Electronic resourse]. — Access mode: 

http://www.aisp.ws/publico/jsp/herramientas/lstStatistics.jsp?cp=... 
2 Built by the author on the basis of IASP worldwide statistics on STPs, 2006 — 2010. [Electronic 

resource]. Access mode: http://www.aisp.ws/publico/jsp/herramientas/lstStatistics.jsp?cp=... 



ISSN 1811-9832.INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC POLICY.2013.№ 1 (18) 99

At the beginning of ХХІst century, a new wave of establishing 
scientific and technology parks rose. During the first decade, it  
was created about 27 per cent of technoparks (Fig. 1). By 2012 there 
were more than 1,500 technoparks and about 1,000 innovation centers 
in 76 countries of the world. Over 350,000 companies1 are residents of 
those high-tech associations. The United States is a leader in this 
segment, where the number of science parks exceeds 150; the second 
position is occupied by Japan having 111 science parks. China began 
to found technoparks in 80s of ХХth century, and today there are over 
100 organizations of the specified type, 52 of which were approved by 
the national government, and the rest, by local self-government 
bodies2. 

Therefore, given the results of a study of the evolution of technoparks 
as well as the fact that the current stage of development of the world 
economy is characterized by a change in trends of global technology 
development, it would be appropriate to distinguish 3 main phases of 
technoparks development in the world. At each of the evolutionary phases 
distinguished, the formats of technology parks change due to changes in 
the trends of development of markets, the economy and transformation of 
society as a whole (Table 1). It is also necessary to emphasize that not 
only formats of technoparks themselves change, but their role in the 
development of society and economy also does. The competitiveness and 
profitability of technoparks of old generation rapidly reduce, yielding to 
innovation alliances of new formats.  

The model of technoparks, throughout its existence, has undergone 
some evolution. The early model of science parks was featured by 
existence of the only founder and the main activity was to let out the own 
lands to innovation companies. The modern model of science and 
technology parks provides for several founders, which complicates a 
management mechanism, but is more efficient, especially in raising 
capital. Another distinctive feature of the new model is the availability of 
conditions at a technopark to place on its territory a large number of small 
businesses, which contributes to the formation of a large number of small 
and medium-sized companies engaged in scientific and technical activities 
and have access to using the system of collective services and 
communication with a local university or research center. Thus, according 
to data of the International Association of Science Parks, close relations 
between client companies and universities with the establishment of 
scientific and technical groups exist in most technoparks in the world — 
72 per cent3.  

                     
1 WAINOVA Atlas of Innovation. [Electronic resource]. Access mode: www.wainova.com. 
2 IASP worldwide statistics on STPs, 2010. [Electronic resource]. Access mode: 

http://www.aisp.ws/publico/jsp/herramientas/lstStatistics.jsp?cp=... 
3 Built by the author on the basis of IASP worldwide statistics on STPs, 2006 — 2010. [Electronic 

resource]. Access mode: http://www.aisp.ws/publico/jsp/herramientas/lstStatistics.jsp?cp=... 



TETIANA CHERNYTSKA. 
REGIONAL DIMENSIONS OF INTERNATIONAL SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL COOPERATION 

100

Table 1 Characteristics of the main phases of development  
of technoparks in the world1 

Distinctive feature  
of a phase 

Phases of technopark development 

1st phase (1947—1970) 2nd phase (1971—1985) 3rd phase (1986—2011) 

The dominant form 
of technopark 

University technopark, 
regional, sectoral 
technopark, science city 

Megatechnopark 
(technopole), 
technology incubators, 
specialized technopark, 
technology transfer 
centers 

Network technopark, 
technopark alliances  

Main characteristics 
of the dominant 
form of a 
technopark  

Establsihed at 
universities 

Established as regional 
structures oriented by 
industry 

Established as 
platforms for 
communications 

Basic process Conducting research and 
development 

Commercialization of 
research and 
development 

Creating a space for 
exchange of 
information, joint 
projects 

Core University laboratories, 
integrated design and 
research bureaus of 
transnational 
corporations 

Office systems of 
technology business-
incubators 

Virtual networks, 
network departments 
of technoparks 

Owners of a park Universities, 
transnational companies 

Governments of 
countries, regions, 
municipalities 

Innovation brokers 
and agents, venture 
companies, 
investment pools 

Product of 
technopark 

Innovation product Technological 
solutions and 
technologies 

Research potential 

Main service of 
technopark 

Access to a knowledge 
source (higher education 
establishment) or 
practical problem source 
(company) 

Favorable conditions 
(realtor business), 
broadened related 
services 

Access to the 
professional 
community 

Leading countries United States, United 
Kingdom 

Europe, Asia United States 

 
The phenomenon described above is called a «business incubator» and 

«technology business incubator». Besides business incubators, science and 
technology parks include technology and university centers and residential 
complex. As shown in Fig. 2, a business incubator is one of the main 
structural units, which is present in 88 per cent of technoparks, the second 
largest component is a technology center, its presence is noted in 83 per 
cent of technoparks. While analyzing the activities of science and 
technology parks, it should be noted the fact that they are predominantly 
an urban (or semi-urban) phenomenon. Thus, 66 per cent of technoparks 
are within cities, and another 27 per cent — at a distance less than 25 km. 
                     

1 Prepared by the author based on: Results of the study. Center of Strategic Research «North-West» 
(St. Petersburg: 2010). 



ISSN 1811-9832.INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC POLICY.2013.№ 1 (18) 101

Moreover, 40 per cent of technoparks are located in large cities (with a 
population of over 1 million people.), 39 per cent — in small towns (less 
than 0.5 million people.), and 18 per cent — in medium towns (0.5 — 1 
million people). 

 
Fig. 2. The basic structural components of technology parks 1 

 
The majority of scienсe and technology parks is concentrated in dense 

university regions, many of which have more than five higher education 
establishments or research institutes in the fifty kilometer zone, and 21 per 
cent — more than twenty universities. Technology parks and university 
structures have quite close cooperation relations, including the sharing of 
university funds and faculty laboratories (54 per cent), diversified services 
(65 per cent). 

Technoparks, with regard to their structure, can be public, private, and 
have mixed form of ownership. According to the most recent data of the 
International Association of Science Parks there are 26 per cent of 
technoparks in the state ownership, 12 per cent are privately owned, and 
22 per cent are of mixed ownership. However, these indicators are unable 
to provide a complete picture of the distribution of property rights, as there 
are no data up to 26 per cent of the technoparks in the world. But in 
general, it is possible to say that the current ownership structure is quite 
proportionate, and it is not threatened by imbalance. 

Technology parks, in support of their activities, get as a rule some 
support, which, as to its origin, may be both public and private. The most 
common forms of support to technoparks in the world are grants and 
subsidies. Fig. 3 shows the number of technoparks (per cent of the total 
number) which use some or other form of support. 
                     

1 Built by the author on the basis of IASP worldwide statistics on STPs, 2006 — 2010. [Electronic 
resource]. Access mode: http://www.aisp.ws/publico/jsp/herramientas/lstStatistics.jsp?cp=... 



TETIANA CHERNYTSKA. 
REGIONAL DIMENSIONS OF INTERNATIONAL SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL COOPERATION 

102

 
Fig. 3. Categories of public support to technoparks1 

 
When analyzing the scope of activities of science and technology 

parks, it can be noted that 50 per cent comprise from 50 to 100 innovation 
companies in their structure, while 16 per cent of technoparks (101 — 200 
companies) have the average size, and large technoparks (over 200 
companies) are 20 per cent of the total number. 

Technology parks are divided into three groups as to the scope of 
activities: 
 «Universal» — technoparks, client companies of which may be 

employed in various technology sectors (36 per cent of all technoparks); 
 «Specialized» — technoparks, which specialize in a particular 

technology sector or a small group of sectors (16 per cent of the total 
number of parks); 
 «Semi-specialized» — technoparks, which prefer specific sectors of 

technology, but they may include companies from other sectors being 
outside the range of technopark priorities (40 per cent). 

The scientific and technical cooperation of technology parks with 
industrial clusters is rather promising area of economic activity for both 
participants in the co-operation and a region as a whole. This statement is 
supported by location and specialization of technoparks and industrial 
clusters. Thus, according to data of the International Association of 
Science Parks, the vast majority of technoparks in the world (65 per cent) 
is located near business clusters, and in 44 per cent of cases both 
tehcnoparks and clusters specialize in the same technology sector. 

In general, science and technology parks are the main driving force in 
the development of regions; they have proven their ability to attract and 
retain intellectual resources, which in turn, leads, by creating a critical 

                     
1 Built by the author on the basis of IASP worldwide statistics on STPs, 2006 — 2010. [Electronic 

resource]. Access mode: http://www.aisp.ws/publico/jsp/herramientas/lstStatistics.jsp?cp=... 



ISSN 1811-9832.INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC POLICY.2013.№ 1 (18) 103

mass, to enhanced technology and innovation competitiveness of a region. 
It is worth to distinguish a particularly important factor in the success of 
scientific and technological development of the region, that is leadership 
of academic research and development of industrial technology clusters, 
which would make it possible to create a favorable environment for the 
development of cooperation in innovation activities and thus, would 
contribute to technology transfer and commercialization. 

The scientific and technical cooperation within the North American 
region is mainly represented by the activities of technology parks. Today, 
in this region there are almost two hundred technoparks. It is possible, on 
the basis of studies of the North American Association of University 
Research Parks (AURP)1, to draw some conclusions about the 
development of this form of scientific and technical activities. AURP 
carried out the monitoring of 134 technoparks, accounting for 77 per cent 
of the total number in the specified region. The fact that the vast majority 
(81 per cent) of research parks are located in the United States, another 19 
per cent — in Canada, becomes quite clear. Technology parks of North 
America are mostly located in the suburbs and small towns. 

An important indicator of the effectiveness of a park’s activity, as on 
the global scale, is the creation of new jobs, which there are about 750 in a 
typical technopark. In general, the North American research parks provide 
more than 300 thousand jobs, where each staffing position generates 2.57 
new vacancies for the region's economy as a whole2. Thus, over 750,000 
jobs were created under the influence of university research parks in North 
America. 

Those having the overwhelming proportion as 72 per cent in the 
internal structure of analyzed parks of the region are commercial firms, 
university departments account for 14 per cent and government agencies 
account for 5 per cent only. The main sectors of scientific and 
technological activities are represented, as worldwide, by information 
technologies, pharmaceuticals and provision of scientific and technical 
services. A list of support services of parks on business and 
commercialization of innovations includes assistance in participation in 
state or other public scientific and technical programs, assistance in raising 
capital resources, business planning, assistance in creating the marketing 
and business strategies, performance of marketing and technology 
assessment. 

An analysis of the structure of funding the university research parks in 
North America showed that the main source of funding the parks is their 
own resources, i.e. the parks receive 61.2 per cent of the funding from 
their activities. The second large proportion belongs to university 
resources — 14.7 per cent, 10.5 per cent of proceeds received by a park 
                     

1 AURP-Battelle Study on Characteristics and Trends in North American Research Parks: 21st 
Century Directions. [Electronic resource]. Access mode: http://www.aurp.net/battelle-report. 

2 IASP worldwide statistics on STPs, 2006 — 2010. [Electronic resource]. Access mode: 
http://www.aisp.ws/publico/jsp/herramientas/lstStatistics.jsp?cp=... 



TETIANA CHERNYTSKA. 
REGIONAL DIMENSIONS OF INTERNATIONAL SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL COOPERATION 

104

are provided by the state and local governments, 4.3 per cent are federal 
resources, 3.9 per cent are of corporate origin and 5.4 per cent of financing 
are provided from other sources. It is also worth to note that the vast 
majority of technoparks has at its disposal an annual operating budget of 
up to USD 1 million1.  

Modern regional dimensions of international scientific  
and technical cooperation of the EU countries 

Active development of regionalization processes in Europe is 
supported both «top-down» (through the European Commission and 
national governments) and «bottom-up» (on initiatives of regions 
themselves). A growing trend toward centralization as well as deepening 
of European integration has contributed to enhancement of the role of 
regions in Western Europe and, with the elimination of many 
intergovernmental barriers during creation of the EU common market, 
expanding their cooperation, particularly in the field of science and 
technology. Thus, industrial clusters, in our opinion, play a significant role 
in the scientific and technical cooperation of regions. 

When analyzing the innovation activities of companies in the member 
countries of the European Union during 2008-2010, it should be noted the 
highest level of innovation activities in Germany where innovatively 
active enterprises account for 79.3 per cent, the second position belongs to 
Luxembourg (68.1 per cent), and the third one — to Belgian companies 
(60.9 per cent). On average, in the European Union (excluding Greece) 
52.9 per cent of enterprises were engaged in innovation activities. The 
lowest level of innovation activity was registered in Bulgaria (27.1 per 
cent), Poland (28.1 per cent) and Latvia (29.9 per cent).2 

As far as the types of implemented innovations are concerned, the 
companies in the European Union are represented by three categories: 1) 
those that implemented an innovation product and/or innovation process; 
2) those that introduced organizational and marketing innovations; and 3) 
companies that were involved in the simultaneous implementation of the 
above two types of innovations. Recent studies have revealed regular 
dependence: companies with innovation activities of high intensity are 
engaged in implementation of different types of innovations, that is they 
belong to the third category, and vice versa, companies with innovation 
activity of low intensity belong to categories 1 and 2. Thus, the share of 
the third category companies in Germany, Luxembourg and Belgium, 
where innovation activities of the highest intensity were observed, is 58.7 
per cent, 61.5 per cent and 55.4 per cent, respectively. In the countries 
where during 2008-2010, it was observed innovation activities of 
                     

1 IASP worldwide statistics on STPs, 2006 — 2010. [Electronic resource]. Access mode: 
http://www.aisp.ws/publico/jsp/herramientas/lstStatistics.jsp?cp=... 

2 Innovation Union Scoreboard 2013. [Electronic resource]. Access mode: http://ec.europa.eu/ 
enterprise/policies/innovation/facts-figures-analysis/innovation-scoreboard/index_en.htm 



ISSN 1811-9832.INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC POLICY.2013.№ 1 (18) 105

significantly lower intensity, the number of the third category enterprises 
was also proportionally lower: in Bulgaria — only 29.5 per cent, in 
Romania — 32.3 per cent, in Poland — 33.3 per cent and in Latvia — 
34.5 per cent 1. 

Today, the fact of efficiency of international scientific and technical 
cooperation, particularly in the context of strengthening the competitive 
positions in the global market is obvious and does not need a separate 
proof. Studies of innovation activities of enterprises in the European 
Union suggest that a quarter of them (25.5 per cent) were involved in the 
scientific and technical cooperation. These cooperation relations were 
established by companies with other enterprises in a sector, with suppliers, 
commercial laboratories, universities and research institutes. Among the 
most active cooperators, it is worth to note the enterprises of Cyprus (62.3 
per cent of all innovatively active companies), Austria (51 per cent), 
Slovenia (44.7 per cent), Lithuania (43.3 per cent), Hungary (43.2 per 
cent). The lowest level of scientific and technical cooperation was 
observed among the companies in Italy (12.1 per cent), the United 
Kingdom (13.7 per cent), Malta (18.5 per cent), Portugal (19.5 per cent), 
Spain (22.3 per cent) and Bulgaria (22.4 per cent)2. 

Taking advantages of new organizational forms, according to the 
experience of developed countries, becomes possible due to the emergence 
of corresponding clusters at regional level3. A vision of a cluster operation 
was presented by Wolfgang Price, an American economist, who stated that 
«The creation of clusters and introduction of the cluster model of company 
behavior is a way to restore trust between the government and business 
and to transform isolated firms in the  

business community».4 This provision focuses on the importance of 
creation and development of clusters for innovation activities. 

The world practice shows that the clustering process is extremely 
important for regional development, especially in the context of 
international scientific and technical cooperation. Thus, in 2006, the 
«Manifesto of Clustering in the Countries of the European Union» was 
approved, and later in 2008 it was adopted the «European Cluster 
Memorandum», whereby the coordination of innovation development of 
the EU Member States is carried out on the basis of cluster associations. 
At the beginning of 2012, it was clusters with a high level of concentration 
and specialization that provided the highest performance of innovation 
activities. To maintain and enhance high-tech development, many 
countries have already adopted the national cluster strategies. The 
                     

1 Innovation Union Scoreboard 2013. [Electronic resource]. Access mode: 
http://ec.europa.eu/enterprise/policies/innovation/facts-figures-analysis/innovation-
scoreboard/index_en.htm 

2 Innovative Regions in Europe Network. [Electronic resource]. Access mode: 
http://cordis.europa.eu/innovation/en/policy/home.html 

3 Porter M.E., Competition, trans. from English, textbook (M.: Williams, 2001), 495 pp. 
4 Price Wolfgang, «The role of non-governmental organizations as an engine of change,» 

Perspectives of study No. 2 (1999): p.24-36. 



TETIANA CHERNYTSKA. 
REGIONAL DIMENSIONS OF INTERNATIONAL SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL COOPERATION 

106

following countries may serve as an example: Luxembourg, France, 
Latvia, Lithuania and Slovenia. The regional cluster strategies have been 
introduced in Spain and Belgium. The cluster associations are rather 
popular in Denmark, Norway, Netherlands, Portugal, Ireland, Iceland, 
Israel and Greece as well, although these countries currently have no 
clearly articulated cluster strategy. In these countries, there were 
conducted a study of the impact of clusters on initiation of scientific and 
technical activities on the basis of an analysis of over 3,500 companies, 
most of which noted stimulating influence of joining the cluster network 
on expansion of business and enhancement of innovation activities1. 

Partnerships within clusters are determined primarily by geographic 
proximity and depend on the nature and frequency of interaction between 
the participants in a particular activity area. When analyzing the activities 
of companies in the European Union clusters, one may conclude that the 
vast majority of them (50 per cent) actively cooperate with each other 
within the same network, and almost 23 per cent are involved in several 
cooperative relations. At the same time, still a quarter of companies (26 
per cent) which do not participate in partnership networks. It is worth to 
note, looking at individual countries in the region, that Scandinavian 
countries (Finland, Sweden, Denmark, Norway) most actively cooperate. 
In this region, the majority of companies is involved in two or more 
partnership networks (44 per cent), with only one company of ten not 
involved in such networks. However, it should be noted that in some 
countries of the European region there is rather low intensity interaction 
between the companies of a cluster. Thus, only 51 per cent of companies 
in the Czech Republic participate in the cluster partnership network, in 
Italy this indicator is 49 per cent, in Hungary — 48 per cent, in Slovakia 
— 41 per cent, and in Belgium, Portugal and Slovenia — 39 per cent 2. 

A study of cluster companies’ activity in Europe shows a tendency to 
team up in cooperative networks of companies which are rather engaged 
in providing high-tech services than employed in manufacturing of 
companies. And it is worth to emphasize the importance of high 
technology in such associations as low-tech products and low knowledge 
are not likely to act in partnership networks. To evaluate the performance 
of a cluster, it is important to distinguish the effects of its operation. A 
cluster as a stable partner association has the potential that exceeds the 
simple sum of potentials of its individual parts and is the result of effective 
combination of competition and cooperation, which creates the cluster’s 
synergy effect. Thus, the effects arising from the cluster activities are 
associated with the synergy that manifests itself in the actions of its 
members, namely, economies of scale, effect of coverage, effect of 

                     
1 Ukraine: Services on support to SMEs in priority regions EuropeAid/121495/C/SV/UA. [Electronic 

resource]. Access mode: http://economy-mk.gov.ua/ books/ClusterHandbookUkr.pdf 
2 Calculated by the author according to: Innobarometer on cluster’s role in facilitating innovation in 

Europe: Analytical Report, July 2006 (Innobarometer, 2011). [Electronic resource]. Access mode: 
http://cordis.europa.eu/ innovation/en/policy/innobarometer.htm.  



ISSN 1811-9832.INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC POLICY.2013.№ 1 (18) 107

reduction in transaction costs, effect of spillover of knowledge and 
innovation, anti-trigger effect1, effect of investment benefits and risk 
sharing, effect of sharing the infrastructure facilities. 

When considering the structure of partnership networks existing in the 
European Union, it should be noted that 70 per cent are SMEs, 64 per cent — 
public institutions, 61 per cent — financial institutions, 60 per cent — large 
companies, universities and other educational institutions — 55 per cent, 
newly incorporated companies — 40 per cent, scientific laboratories and 
research centers — 36 per cent. The fact that 21 per cent of companies in the 
United Kingdom considers cooperation with public institutions extremely 
important is quite interesting, while the average percentage of other EU 
countries, which gave a similar assessment is 5 per cent only. However, it 
should be noted that the most diverse relations between cluster members exist 
in the countries being new EU members — an average of 4.84, while in the 
European Union — 4.23 (out of 7 possible types of cooperation). For 
example, this index in Lithuania is registered at 5.24, in Slovenia — 5.13 in 
Latvia — 5.05, in Poland — 5.04, in Cyprus — 5.00, and in the applicant's 
country of Croatia, this index is the highest and amounts to 5.42. The 
countries with the lowest index of cooperation relations diversity in the 
European Union are Hungary (3.71), the Netherlands (3.82), Italy (4.0), the 
Czech Republic (4.0) and Switzerland (4.0)2. 

The cooperation of companies within clusters may be characterized not 
only by the intensity and variety of relations. Quite an important indicator 
of this interaction is the benefits that companies gain from the cooperation 
with other members of a cluster. One of the most common forms of 
cooperation studied is information transfer, which is considered a «mild 
form». Companies see the largest advantage of interaction in a cluster the 
availability of skilled personnel (64 per cent), almost as many (62 per 
cent) note the importance of transfer of reliable and high-quality market 
information. 61 per cent of companies noted the importance of forming 
within the cluster of business incentives, while 59 per cent pointed to the 
efficiency of cooperation in the framework of joint innovation projects. 

 The cluster paradigm argues that competition within a cluster is more 
intensive than the external one. However, the results of a survey of 
Innobarometer confirm this hypothesis only partially3. Thus, 43 per cent of 
companies in the EU clusters argue that the competition is normal, but 
another 44 per cent say about more intensive competition within a cluster. 

                     
1 Trigger effect occurs when for implementation of a primary innovation (production) it is necessary 

to make a lot of expensive secondary changes, due to which a profit from the basic innovation 
(production) may be even less than the cost of forced reorganization. Cluster allows minimizing the cost 
of such changes by implementing a variety of technologies. 

2Innobarometer on cluster’s role in facilitating innovation in Europe: Analytical Report, July 2006 
(Innobarometer, 2011). [Electronic resource]. Access mode: http://cordis.europa.eu/innovation/en/policy/ 
innobarometer.htm. 

3 Innobarometer on cluster’s role in facilitating innovation in Europe: Analytical Report, July 2006 
(Innobarometer, 2011). [Electronic resource]. Access mode: http://cordis.europa.eu/innovation/ 
en/policy/innobarometer.htm 



TETIANA CHERNYTSKA. 
REGIONAL DIMENSIONS OF INTERNATIONAL SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL COOPERATION 

108

It is worth to note a lower level of competition in the clusters of 
Scandinavian countries, where 61 per cent of companies in Finland say 
about this fact; they are joined by Denmark (52 per cent) and the 
Netherlands (56 per cent). The companies in Turkey (80 per cent), in 
Spain (69 per cent), in Slovenia (66 per cent) and in Ireland (63 per cent) 
speak about tighter competition in clusters,. 

It is worth to note that the innovation activities of companies included 
in clusters are more intensive than the innovative activities of other 
companies in Europe. According to a study, 78 per cent of clusters of 
innovation companies have recently introduced new or significantly 
improved products, if to compare throughout the region, 74 per cent of 
companies were engaged in the respective activities. In addition, 63 per 
cent of innovation companies in clusters have introduced new production 
technologies (56 per cent in the region). The companies studied more 
effectively carry out market research (53 per cent v. 33 per cent). 
However, the most essential difference between the innovation companies 
in clusters is the intensity of cooperation with other members of a cluster, 
including with research centers, universities and laboratories. This 
indicator is more than twice higher than the analogous one in European 
innovation companies. 

Another important indicator of innovation nature of companies within 
the European clusters is patents and trademarks. During 2004 — 2010, 
these companies noticeably improved their performance in the patent 
activity. For example, in 2004 only 12 per cent of companies applied for 
the registration of patents, and in 2006 the share of innovation companies 
willing to register their patents increased to 29 per cent and in the post-
crisis 2010, the indicator was close to 30 per cent1. 

The creation of a common European market, narrowing of national market 
niches stimulates the formation of trans-regional (such that cross national 
boundaries) network structures, the initiative of which creation belongs to 
those regions that are interested in restructuring the local economy and 
supporting the industries that dynamically develop. These formations created 
by the efforts of regions of two or more countries may be of different types 
(unions, associations, co-operation in solving specific scientific and technical 
problems of a region) and of territorial or extraterritorial nature. Thus, the 
association of border regions of France, Belgium and Luxembourg was 
created for overcoming the steel industry crisis. To restructure the coal and 
steel industries of North Moravia and Silesia, the enterprises and research 
institutes of the Czech Republic, Austria, Slovakia and Poland cooperate in 
the framework of the program «EUREKA». 

Along with the border cooperation, the regions which have no common 
borders, but pursue common interests develop their cooperation. Examples 
of such associations may serve groups of regions Baden-Wurttemberg 
(Germany), Lombardy (Italy), Catalonia (Spain) and Wales (United 
                     

1 Ibid. 



ISSN 1811-9832.INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC POLICY.2013.№ 1 (18) 109

Kingdom) for the purpose of long-term economic and scientific-technical 
cooperation. Thus, in the United Kingdom there is a network of 12 areas 
of advanced aerospace and automotive industries with the common center 
at Warwick University, which aim is to establish relations with 
prospective partners in Europe. 

Other examples of successful international scientific and technical 
cooperation are such regional organizations as: the association of Nord-Pas de 
Calais (France) and the province Walloon Brabant (Belgium), which 
activities focused on growth of innovative technological capacity of small 
business through technology changes and implementation of 
intergovernmental economic development projects, and also the network 
CAR (cities and regions of the automotive industry), which was established at 
the initiative of the European Commission, it is composed of Antwerp 
(Belgium), Coventry (United Kingdom), Stuttgart (Germany), Piedmont 
(Italy) and Valladolid (Spain), the purpose of creation is to solve the problem 
of restructuring the automobile industry, sharing of organizational and 
production experience, promotion of technology modernization of small 
enterprises and development of small and medium businesses. 

One of the goals of international scientific and technical cooperation is 
to create a cross-border cooperation system by both the member countries 
of an integration group and its individual regions with other countries. 
Rongxing Guo, a Chinese scholar, summarized the global experience in 
this approach at rather high level1. In his opinion, Mexican-American and 
Canadian-American cross-border associations, besides the European ones, 
should be mentioned as an example of successful cross-border 
cooperation. The Israeli-Palestinian associations were less successful that 
was later proven by life. 

The strengthening of intra-European central trends that shape a new 
global region will always lead to the emergence of new regional 
formations with which the European Union will have close economic and 
political ties. Ray Hudson and Allan Williams, British researchers, 
perceive two major directions of expansion of the global European region. 
One of them is to move to the south (Mediterranean), the other, to the east 
(Central European)2.  

Reference points for Ukraine 

At the present stage of development of the world economy, much of the 
countries are at the stage of transition to the sixth technological structure that 
is primarily characterized by continuous innovation process. According to 
various expert appraisals, from 50 per cent to 90 per cent of GDP growth in 
developed countries is formed by high technology. However, in Ukraine, 
                     

1 Rongxing Guo, Border-Regional Economics: Contribution to Economics (Heidelberg: Physica 
Verlag, 1996), 231 pp. 

2 Hudson Ray, Williams Allan, Divided Europe, Society and Territory (L.: Sage, 1999), 342 р. 



TETIANA CHERNYTSKA. 
REGIONAL DIMENSIONS OF INTERNATIONAL SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL COOPERATION 

110

despite some efforts, innovation breakthrough has not yet occurred; the 
country continues to be on the periphery of the world economy. In recent 
years the share of domestic innovatively active enterprises in the total number 
of industrial enterprises has noticeably increased and at the end of 2012 it was 
17.4 per cent1, but this figure is several times lower than the one in developed 
countries. The share of innovation products in the total volume of industrial 
sales is only3,3 per cent2, and with regard to the share of Ukraine in the 
global high-tech exports, this figure is very low at all — about 0.18 per cent, 
which equals an average of USD 4.1 billion per year. Thus, a potential of 
domestic exports of high-tech products is higher and is estimated at USD 10-
15 billion or 0.3-0.5 per cent of the world exports3. But to have it effectively 
realized, it is critically needed the creation and promotion of an innovation 
model of national economic development, in particular through the formation 
of local innovation alliances.  

Years of experience in leading countries development demonstrate the 
failure of market mechanisms to independently ensure an adequate level of 
efficiency of national economy and its international competitiveness. The 
formation of an appropriate mechanism of state regulation of economic 
processes is crucial in this regard. So today, there is no country with a highly 
developed economy in the world, where the state would evade the regulation 
and promotion of innovation activities. The state authorities and local self-
government bodies in Ukraine will be really able to influence the process of 
regional economy clustering if necessary clear objective criteria of clusters 
performance and relevant authorizations to set preferences are available. 
Thus, establishment of clusters on the basis of scientific institutions in a 
region will have the primary positive impact on the economy development. 

The factors that generate a positive result with regard to the cluster 
formation in regional innovation systems may include:  
 expansion of science and technology and information infrastructure 

in the region; 
 willingness of business entities to cooperate;  
 mobility to use regional resources;  
 ensuring the stability of inter-regional relations;  
 strengthening of partnership relations in international scientific and 

technical and foreign economic cooperation, etc.  
On the other hand, there is a number of organizational and economic 

factors that hinder the development of clusters in Ukraine, namely:  
 low level of quality of joint business management in certain sectors 

the economic structures conduct activities both within a region and at 
interregional level;  
                     

1 Innovation activities, Scientific and innovation activities (1990-2012), State Statistics Service of 
Ukraine [Electronic resource]. Access mode: http://www.ukrstat.gov.ua/. 

2 Introduction of innovations at industrial enterprises, Scientific and innovation activities (1990-
2012), State Statistics Service of Ukraine [Electronic resource]. Access mode: 
http://www.ukrstat.gov.ua/. 

3 Breus S.V., «Analysis of the status and prospects of export of high-tech products of industry in 
Ukraine,» Strategic Priorities № 1(2010), P.16-22. 



ISSN 1811-9832.INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC POLICY.2013.№ 1 (18) 111

 insufficient level of development of cross-border relations between 
cooperation entities, which usually are not ready to independently shape 
the priorities for realization of regional business interests; 
 unsatisfactory level of collective planned and programmed decisions 

on regional economic development;  
 considerable time limits to achieve the expected results (which are 

usually a few years after the creation of a cluster), etc. 
The scientific and technical potential available in Ukraine, including the 

number and qualifications of staff who has relevant scientific knowledge and 
also creates the conditions for development of innovations, innovation 
infrastructure, provides an opportunity to conduct the innovation activities 
within regions not only at a particular enterprise, but also in collaboration of 
enterprises in a cluster. Moreover, the functioning of sufficient number of 
scientific institutions (higher education establishments, research institutes, 
etc.) with the appropriate base for scientific research provides an opportunity 
to conduct, jointly with industrial enterprises, research, to develop new 
technologies and equipment for manufacturing products and rendering 
services. Thus, given the sectoral specialization of each particular region as 
well as the availability of scientific organizations, it is necessary not only to 
create regional clusters, but also organize their cooperation with other 
industrial enterprises and scientific organizations in other regions for further 
development. This is especially true for domestic regions and Euro-regions 
with involvement of Ukraine. 

It is this Central European vector that is important for Ukraine in terms 
of international scientific and technical cooperation. With the accession of 
new members to the European Union, the total boundary line with the 
European Union increased significantly for Ukraine (Poland → Slovakia 
→ Hungary → Romania). The expected increase in FDI in the above 
countries may change the current tendency to their concentration in the 
capital and lead to gradual move eastward. Thus, venture capital, because 
of its high risk, may be concentrated in those spaces that will form Euro-
regions (technozones), technology parks and clusters. And so it is crucial 
for Ukraine is to restore the practice of establishment and operation of 
local innovation alliances and their integration into international scientific 
and technical cooperation. At the first stage, science and technology parks 
(according to classification of A. Poruchnyk and L. Antoniuk)1 will be 
likely represented by promotion and clusters will be small in size, but 
numerous and quite mobile mono-specialized formations. International 
scientific and technical cooperation in these new formations can be quite 
productive at the account of its stimulation by two (or many) parties, 
which would ensure, as the experience of the leading countries in the 
world proves, economic growth and enhancement of national 
competitiveness of regions, and hence of the country as a whole.  
                     

1 Poruchnyk A.M., Antoniuk L.L., Venture Capital: International Experience and Problems of 
Development in Ukraine: monograph (К.: KNEU, 2000), 356 pp. 



TETIANA CHERNYTSKA. 
REGIONAL DIMENSIONS OF INTERNATIONAL SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL COOPERATION 

112

Conclusions 

To summarize, it is safe to state with certainty that technology parks 
are an important tool of public policy (especially, the economic, scientific 
and technical one) aimed at faster growth of high-tech sector of 
production. It is the state, not a business that determines orientation of 
economic development in any country of the world, so the development 
and implementation of effective macro-innovation strategy is extremely 
important for Ukraine. One of the priorities of this strategy should be the 
intensive development of high technologies through the creation and 
activation of technoparks that would provide targeted government support 
to own designs and production arrangement on the base of these designs. 
Thus, technoparks, along with other local innovation alliances should have 
become the efficient for Ukraine in building the economy based on 
knowledge. 

Therefore, one of the priority objectives, given orientation to the 
activation of innovation development, is the training of qualified 
personnel with a certain level of knowledge for further work in 
appropriate scientific and technical institutions. In addition, it is 
urgently needed appropriate allocation both of scientific personnel and 
scientific organizations according to the needs of the economy of 
regions for innovation growth of the country’s national complex as a 
whole. Using high technologies, as a result of achieving the goals set, 
will rise the technical level and quality of products manufactured, will 
better meet the needs and, what is most importantly, result in 
production efficiency by reducing labor and resources inputs per unit of 
output, thus freeing the resources for use in areas which development 
enhances the quality of population life in general. 

It is eventually worth to note that enhancement of technology 
regionalization may lead to the formation of new models of science and 
technology policy, including its local, regional and global components. A 
gap between developed and economically weak regions is unlikely to be 
offset without appropriate measures. Therefore, further research should be 
reasonably aimed at the development of specific regional innovation 
strategies with taking into account the national specificities.  

References 

1. Antoniuk L. L., Poruchnyk A. M., Savchuk V. S., Innovation: theory, 
mechanism of development and commercialization: monograph (К.: KNEU, 2003), 
211 pp. [in Ukrainian]. 

2. AURP-Battelle Study on Characteristics and Trends in North American 
Research Parks: 21st Century Directions. [Electronic resource]. Access mode: 
http://www.aurp.net/battelle-report. 



ISSN 1811-9832.INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC POLICY.2013.№ 1 (18) 113

3. Breus S.V., «Analysis of the status and prospects of export of high-tech 
products of industry in Ukraine,» Strategic Priorities № 1 (2010), P. 16—22. [in 
Ukrainian] 

4. Built by the author on the basis of IASP worldwide statistics on STPs, 2006 
— 2010. [Electronic resource]. Access mode: http://www.aisp.ws/publico/ 
jsp/herramientas/ lstStatistics.jsp?cp=... 

5. Chuzhykov V. I., Regional integration strategies of post-socialist countries of 
Europe monograph (K.: LLC «Kadry», 2003), 297 pp. [in Ukrainian]. 

6. Fedina E. V., «Modern directions for the development of a region, based on 
cluster formation,» E.V.Fedina, K.V. Ekimova, Development of the economy in the 
context of finance crisis: problems and prospects: coll.works of participants in 
Internat. scien.& practc. conf (St. Petersburg: Polytechnic University, 2009), P. 53-
60. [in Russian] 

7. Filipenko A. S., Global forms of economic development: History and 
Modernity monograph, (K.: Knowledge, 2007), 670 pp. [in Ukrainian]. 

8. Halchynskyi A. S., Heyets V. M., Kinah A. K., Seminozhenko V. P., Innovation 
strategy of Ukrainian reforms (K.: Knowledge of Ukraine, 2002), 326 pp. [in 
Ukrainian]. 

9. Hudson Ray, Williams Allan, Divided Europe, Society and Territory (L.: 
Sage, 1999), 342р. 

10. IASP worldwide statistics on STPs, 2006. [Electronic resourse]. Access 
mode: http://www.aisp.ws/publico/jsp/herramientas/lstStatistics.jsp?cp=... 

11. IASP worldwide statistics on STPs, 2010. [Electronic resource]. Access 
mode: http://www.aisp.ws/publico/jsp/herramientas/lstStatistics.jsp?cp=... 

12. Innobarometer on cluster’s role in facilitating innovation in Europe: 
Analytical Report, July 2006. [Electronic resource]. Access mode: 
http://cordis.europa.eu/innovation/en/ policy/innobarometer.htm. 

13. Innobarometer — 2011. [Electronic resource]. Access mode: 
http://cordis.europa.eu/ innovation/en/policy/innobarometer.htm. 

14. Innovation activities, Scientific and innovation activities (1990-2012). State 
Statistics Service of Ukraine [Electronic resource]. Access mode: 
http://www.ukrstat.gov.ua/. 

15. Innovation Union Scoreboard 2013. [Electronic resource]. Access mode: 
http://ec.europa.eu/enterprise/policies/innovation/facts-figures-analysis/innovation-
scoreboard/index_en.htm 

16. Innovative Regions in Europe Network. [Electronic resource]. Access mode: 
http://cordis.europa.eu/innovation/en/policy/home.html 

17. Introduction of innovations at industrial enterprises, Scientific and innovation 
activities (1990—2012). State Statistics Service of Ukraine [Electronic resource]. 
Access mode: http://www.ukrstat.gov.ua/. 

18. Karan J. Sorensen, Firm Characteristics: Collaborative Culture and 
Perceived Issues with University-to-Industry Knowledge Transfer, Stevens Institute 
of Technology, Wesley J., Howe School of Technology Management, Castle Point 
on Hudson, Hoboken, NJ 07030 (Oct. 2006), 457 р. 

19. Main Science and Technology Indicators. OECD: Directorate for Science, 
Technology and Industry. [Electronic resource]. Access mode: http://www.oecd.org/ 
sti/msti.htm 

20. OECD Science, Technology and Industry Outlook 2012. [Electronic resource]. 
Access mode: http://www.keepeek.com/oecd/media/science-and-technology/ oecd-
science-technology-and-industry-outlook-2012_sti_outlook-2012-en 



TETIANA CHERNYTSKA. 
REGIONAL DIMENSIONS OF INTERNATIONAL SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL COOPERATION 

114

21. Porter M. E., Competition, trans. from English, textbook (M.: Williams, 
2001), 495 pp. 

22. Poruchnyk A. M., Antoniuk L. L., Venture Capital: International Experience 
and Problems of Development in Ukraine: monograph (К.: KNEU, 2000), 356 pp. [in 
Ukrainian]. 

23. Price Wolfgang, «The role of non-governmental organizations as an engine 
of change,» Perspectives of study No. 2 (1999), P.24-36. 

24. Rongxing Guo, Border-Regional Economics: Contribution to Economics 
(Heidelberg: Physica Verlag, 1996), 231 pp. 

25. Tatsuno Sh., Strategy — tehnopole/lane, trans. from English by Tatsuno Sh. 
(Moscow: Progress, 1989), 227 pp. 

26. Ukraine: Services on support to SMEs in priority regions 
EuropeAid/121495/C/SV/UA. [Electronic resource]. Access mode: http://economy-
mk.gov.ua/books/ ClusterHandbookUkr.pdf 

27. WAINOVA Atlas of Innovation. [Electronic resource]. Access mode: 
www.wainova.com. 

 
The article was received by editorial board on 18.02.2013 


