










































1 / 21 
 

Amsterdam, 30 November 2012 

Authors: Herman Wijffels (Worldconnectors), Rolph van der Hoeven (ISS), 

Jos van Gennip (Socires), Frans van den Boom (NCDO) and Gabi Spitz 

(NCDO) 

E-mail: info@ncdo.nl  

A new approach to 

international 

cooperation 

“Threefold reform for threefold gain: innovation, 

expansion and coordination as the basis for better 

foreign policy”  



2 / 21 
 

 
 

Contents 

Introduction 3 

1. A changing world 4 

2. The added value of development cooperation 7 
2.1. Dutch expertise 7 
2.2. An international economy 7 

3. Towards a ‘National Commitment’ to international cooperation 9 
3.1. A new agenda with broad support 9 
3.2. Restructuring the aid channels 11 

4. Global citizenship: the contribution of the various actors 12 
4.1. Individuals 12 
4.2. The private sector 12 
4.3. The major philanthropists 13 
4.4. Civil society organizations 13 

5. Prerequirements and policy recommendations 14 
5.1. Recommendations 14 

6. A new role for DGIS 17 

7. Conclusion 19 

8. References 20 
 



3 / 21 
 

Introduction 

The new coalition agreement presents some striking reforms in the field of international cooperation. 
One ambition is to establish clearer links between policy addressing sustainability, poverty reduction 
and security. The creation of the new post of Minister for International Trade and Development 
Cooperation underlines that there is indeed a relationship between international trade and poverty. 
However, the ambitious programme is accompanied by a 25% reduction in the development 
cooperation budget. It seems that the government hopes to do much more with much less funding. In 
this discussion paper, experts from the worlds of research, politics and the civil society propose a far-
reaching reform of international cooperation. Innovation, expansion (in terms of both effort and 
resources) and stronger coordination are cited as the three strands which will combine to create an 
effective, integrated approach to poverty reduction, sustainability and security. It must be remembered 
that international cooperation is not solely a government responsibility; it requires a national 
commitment based on the principles of reciprocity, global solidarity and the equality of all people, 
everywhere.  
 
In this discussion paper, we first describe the shifts and developments in the field of international 
cooperation before briefly examining the motives and objectives of the Netherlands’ involvement. We 
then propose a new agenda for international cooperation, examining the various aid channels and the 
role of the various actors. The paper concludes with recommendations for the practical 
implementation of the agenda, with a particular emphasis on coherence and coordination.  



4 / 21 
 

 

1. A changing world  

The world is changing. While the emerging economies of Asia and elsewhere are experiencing strong 
growth, virtually the entire developed world is still in the grip of a global financial and economic crisis. 
The ongoing problems of the eurozone continue to have a marked effect in the Netherlands and far 
beyond. Both the euro and the dollar are under pressure and there is great uncertainty about the long-
term tenability of the international financial and monetary system.  
 
Alongside these financial problems, ecological and social systems are being stretched to breaking 
point. Worldwide, we are using natural resources one-and-a-half times faster than the planet can 
generate them, while over two billion world citizens must live on an income of less than two dollars a 
day. In other words, we are plundering the earth’s resources to exhaustion, while a major proportion of 
the world’s population is denied the benefits. The current system, although responsible for much 
progress in the past, is burnt out and no longer ‘fit for purpose’. It is the source of loss and damage in 
so many areas. For the first time in history, mankind is now able to destroy the world in three different 
ways: nuclear weapons, exhausting the planet’s natural resources, and through unchecked pollution. 
An effective response demands international cooperation.  
 
We may soon face even greater challenges. The world’s population continues to grow and is forecast to 
reach over nine billion by the year 2050. Each and every one of those nine billion people is entitled to a 
humane existence. Population growth and the pursuit of prosperity can only increase demand for 
scarce resources such as oil, water and land for agriculture. To meet that demand calls for new 
organizational forms and policy structures, particularly at the international level: the countries of the 
world will become ever more interdependent as the issues of financial stability, resource management 
and climate become more complex. Within this new reality, effective cooperation between and within 
countries is crucial.  
 
Given the shifts in global influence, the role and nature of international cooperation must also change. 
We can identify six key trends:  
1. Economic shifts: while the developed West will continue to see declining, perhaps negative growth, 

the emerging economies will enjoy ongoing positive growth. Figure 1 shows a clear relationship 
between the shifts in economic power and the volume of the money flows to the developing 
countries. The value of official development assistance (ODA) is decreasing in relation to other 
flows such as foreign direct investment (FDI) and the remittances made by migrant workers to 
their countries of origin. The precise nature of the shifts varies according to the recipient country. 
For the very poorest countries, ODA remains a significant component of the foreign money flows. 
ODA represents an average of 10% of the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of the low-income 
countries, while one in ten of those countries rely on ODA for at least 20% of their GDP (Kenny, 
2012). Clearly, development aid remains of great importance to these countries.  

  

 
 

Figure 1: Money flows to the developing countries in billions of dollars (World Bank, 2012) 

 
Although the financial situation in the West is cause for concern, and while global competition 
for resources will increase, the current economic situation has some positive aspects. It is the 
countries which were previously classed as ‘poor’ which are now achieving greatest growth, 
while the ‘rich’ countries are, at best, marking time. Accordingly, we see a more equal and 



5 / 21 
 

equitable distribution of growth and the resultant prosperity. This applies not only to the 
familiar example of the BRIC countries, but to an increasing number of African states, notably 
Ghana. Growth (or future growth) in other developing countries creates new opportunities for 
the Dutch economy. In terms of employment, the Netherlands is already reaping the rewards of 
economic growth in China and India.  

 
2. Poverty is shifting to the middle-income countries. As we see in Figure 2, the problem of poverty is 

no longer confined to the low-income countries but, in absolute terms, can also be seen in the 
middle-income countries. No fewer than three-quarters of the people living beneath the 
international poverty line are to be found in the emerging countries (Sumner, 2010). Almost half 
of the world’s poor live in India (34%) and China (15%), countries which are known for their 
spectacular growth figures. (Sumner, 2012.)  

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2: ‘Shift’ of the world’s poor from the low-income countries to the middle-income countries (from 
Sumner, 2012) 
 

3. Poverty and associated problems are increasingly a distribution issue. The BRIC countries 
demonstrate that economic growth does not automatically lead to any reduction in inequality. In 
fact, inequality in these countries continues to rise, reflecting a worldwide trend. Inequality 
between countries is indeed decreasing, but income inequality between individual citizens in one 
and the same country has been increasing for many years. As the Dutch Scientific Council for 
Government Policy (WRR, 2010) and the Advisory Council on International Affairs (AIV, 2012) 
have stated, effective (complementary) policy is crucial to ensure that the benefits of economic 
growth are fairly distributed. In the low-income and middle-income countries, notably those of 
Latin America where governments have prioritized policy to reduce inequality, some improvement 
can now be seen (Melamed, 2011). In the BRIC countries, where bilateral aid relationships are now 
of lesser importance, NGOs must now assume the lead in tackling inequality.  

 
4. Shared global challenges. Issues such as financial instability, climate change and the depletion of 

natural resources are not confined by national borders. They are, however, of increasing urgency. 
Joint, targeted action and international cooperation are essential if we are to safeguard the global 
public goods for all world citizens. The personal efforts of the individual are also important. The 
rising prices of food and natural resources, scarcity and natural degradation are all influenced to a 
significant degree by consumer behaviour and ongoing population growth. People in the 
Netherlands have no reason to be complacent: if everyone in the world consumed resources at the 
same rate as the average Dutch citizen, we would need 3.5 planet earths to meet the demand 
(WNF, 2012). It is evident that the urgency of these global challenges is increasing by the day, and 
that they are closely linked to problems such as poverty and inequality. After all, increases in food, 
energy and water prices impact the very poorest more than others. The situation is further 
complicated by a lack of agreement between the established ‘rich’ countries and the emerging and 
poorer countries with regard to the urgency of the sustainability agenda and appropriate 
responses.  

 
5. New forms of cooperation. The mandate for development cooperation no longer rests exclusively 

with the OECD-DAC countries and their governments. Increasingly, the development aid sector 



6 / 21 
 

involves other actors: the large funding agencies and international charities, smaller private 
initiatives, migrant organizations and others. The BRIC countries have become important players. 
Brazil, Russia, India and China, themselves regarded as developing countries not so very long ago, 
now have their own development organizations which are actively involved in south-south 
cooperation. Brazil’s official development assistance (ODA) has risen by 20% since 2005, while 
Russia’s contributions increased fourfold between 2006 and 2010 (GHSi, 2012). Much of this aid 
is bilateral, but the new donor flows have also affected the multilateral channel. Until 2005, for 
example, China received aid from the World Food Programme (WFP). It is now a major donor to 
the WFP. Alongside a substantial ongoing contribution, in 2011 the Chinese government made an 
additional donation of sixteen million dollars in response to the food crisis in the Horn of Africa. 
Nevertheless, in absolute figures, the total contribution of the BRIC countries remains limited. In 
2011, the western countries devoted 133.5 billion dollars to official development assistance, of 
which approximately 40% was distributed through the multilateral channel (OECD, 2012). Even 
this figure is less than Europeans’ total annual expenditure on alcohol and tobacco. As yet, Brazil, 
Russia, India, China and South Africa (the BRICS countries) have not reported the amount of their 
aid contributions to the OECD. The total amount in ODA (or similar) flows in 2009 is estimated to 
be in the order of 1.75 billion dollars, primarily in the form of bilateral aid. Increasingly, therefore, 
the developing countries can now choose between various donors. The traditional donor countries 
must accept that they can no longer determine the form and implementation of recipient 
countries’ development agendas.  

 
6. Changes in the international arena. The emergence of the BRIC(S) countries as economic powers 

and donors has changed the multilateral playing field and its ‘rules of play’. Cynthia Roberts, 
writing in The European Financial Review (2011), states that the BRICS countries have in the 
space of just five years become a recognized diplomatic group which has achieved much through 
‘soft power’ and can now offer a counterbalance to the traditional dominance of the West. This was 
evident from the course and outcome of various recent international meetings, such as the 
Copenhagen Climate Conference and the environmental summit in Rio de Janeiro, at which the 
developing and emerging countries made it perfectly clear that they were no longer willing to be 
lectured to by the West. The traditional donor countries are losing their influence in the 
international arena. Global sustainability issues represent one area in which there are very diverse 
views regarding both the urgency of action and the most appropriate form of that action. As a 
result, it is extremely difficult to arrive at adequate international agreements.  



7 / 21 
 

 
 

2. The added value of development cooperation  

Based on the trends described thus far, it is clear that a repositioning of international cooperation is 
essential if the global issues are to be addressed in an adequate manner. At the same time, all other 
motives for involvement in international cooperation, such as solidarity with all world citizens, remain 
relevant. There are, after all, hundreds of millions of people living in the most abject circumstances, 
with no access to basic welfare amenities and little prospect of a better future. One in seven people in 
the world is hungry; every five seconds, a child dies as a direct result of poverty.  
 
The Netherlands has a long tradition of international cooperation. It began providing formal financial 
aid as long ago as 1949, at the behest of the American president Harry S. Truman. During the 1970s, 
the development cooperation budget rose to 0.75% of GDP. This figure was in line with the norm 
suggested by the economist and Nobel Laureate Jan Tinbergen as necessary to stimulate economic 
growth in the poor countries, as endorsed by the World Council of Churches. In subsequent decades, 
the Netherlands emerged as a world leader and very influential player in the field of development 
cooperation and by the mid-1980s was devoting approximately 1% of GNP to international aid. It is 
noteworthy that our country channels a large part of the development cooperation budget 
(approximately 20% in 2012) through private sector organizations such as ICCO, Oxfam Novib, 
Cordaid and Hivos (NCDO, 2012). By doing so, the Netherlands has developed expertise in other 
important areas such as capacity building, civil society development and good governance.  
 
In the last two years, however, the Netherlands has become at risk of losing its leading position in the 
field of international cooperation. This is partly due to the government’s swingeing austerity measures: 
the development cooperation budget for 2012 was 21% lower than in 2010, and a further 25% 
reduction has been announced for the years ahead. Another reason for the Netherlands having lost 
ground is its ‘uncooperative’ attitude. Rob de Wijk, an expert in international relations, noted recently 
that the Netherlands has courted the displeasure of the international community by stubbornly 
refusing to consider opposing views on sensitive issues such as the Hedwige Polder, the eurozone crisis 
and immigration rules.  
 

2.1. Dutch expertise 
It is highly regrettable that the Netherlands is losing its leading position, not least because the Dutch 
have much to offer the world in terms of expertise and experience. A report published by the WRR in 
2010 (Minder Pretentie, Meer Ambitie; ‘Less pretention, more ambition’) contends that the efficiency 
of aid efforts is determined by the degree to which they are based on sound expertise. The added value 
of Dutch development aid is derived from our knowledge and know-how in agriculture, water 
management, justice, civil society development and HIV/Aids. Expertise in agriculture and water 
management also creates opportunities for the Netherlands itself, since the growth in the world 
population will increase the demand for innovative solutions to ensure food security and access to 
water.  
 

2.2. An international economy 
The Dutch economy has a strong international orientation. According to the Internationalization 
Monitor (Statistics Netherlands; CBS, 2011) one in every ten Dutch companies engages in some form 
of international trade. The value of that trade accounts for almost 75% of the country’s GDP. A study 
by the Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis (CPB, 2009) concludes that the openness of 
the national economy accounts for additional per capita income of between 1200 and 1600 euros each 
year.  
 
Of all companies active in the Netherlands, 1% are in foreign ownership. They account for 
approximately 17% of national employment and some 25% of private sector profits. The Netherlands is 
the global leader in terms of foreign direct investment (FDI). Private investments are of immense 
importance to the developing countries. Research has shown a clear link between investment levels 
and economic growth (OECD, 2002). According to the IMF’s Coordinated Direct Investment Survey, 
Dutch companies’ investments in international enterprises totalled 3,700 billion dollars at the end of 
2009. This figure is however distorted by the effects of the favourable fiscal climate in the Netherlands; 
approximately 75% of the Dutch FDIs to other countries are made by organizations which enjoy special 

http://www.nu.nl/politiek/2949777/buitenland-had-moeite-met-gedoogkabinet-rutte-i.html
http://www.dnb.nl/nieuws/nieuwsoverzicht-en-archief/dnbulletin-2011/dnb256487.jsp


8 / 21 
 

fiscal status and exemptions (the Bijzondere Fiscale Instellingen; BFIs). A reasonable estimate of FDIs 
from the Netherlands to developing and emerging countries would be in the order of 106 billion 
dollars.1 This is approximately seventeen times the national ODA budget and – provided it is used 
responsibly – can have a major positive impact on the social, economic and ecological welfare of the 
developing countries and others.  
 
Apart from the long-term benefits of international cooperation, such as the promotion of peace and 
security, there are also short-term gains for the Netherlands. The Dutch private sector does good 
business with (former) aid recipients and international organizations such as the United Nations. 
According to the EVD (an official agency of the Ministry of Economic Affairs), partners and former 
partners such as Indonesia, Bangladesh, Vietnam and Ghana imported Dutch goods and services to a 
value of over 1.5 billion euros in 2010. That is over a third of the current development cooperation 
budget. The United Nations is also an important customer. In 2010, it purchased Dutch goods and 
services to a total value of over 155 million dollars. The financial motive to engage in international 
cooperation therefore remains important, even – or perhaps especially – in the current financial 
climate.  

                                                             
1 When corrected for the BFIs, the Netherlands’ foreign direct investments were 950 billion dollars at year-end 
2009, approximately 25% of the total. Of all FDIs recorded at year-end 2010, almost 423 billion dollars were 
made in businesses in the developing countries. Almost half, 193 billion dollars, represented investments in the 
BRICS countries. It is difficult to assess the exact value of FDIs from the Netherlands excluding the BFI 
component, since the IMF gathers and compares only uncorrected data. However, if we assume that FDIs are 
distorted by fiscal measures to the same extent as overall foreign direct investments, we arrive at a figure of 
approximately 106 billion dollars directed to developing and emerging countries (approximately 25% of the total 
Dutch FDIs in these countries).  



9 / 21 
 

 

3. Towards a ‘National Commitment’ to 
international cooperation  

Although the economic, political, social and ecological importance of international cooperation is 
underestimated by many, there is a groundswell of opinion, both within and beyond political circles, 
that the traditional form of development aid (ODA) is no longer appropriate given the shifts in global 
influence and the issues now being faced. The coalition agreement presented in October by the 
People’s Party for Democracy and Freedom (VVD) and Labour (PvdA), which together hold a 
parliamentary majority, therefore proposes a reform of Dutch international cooperation. The creation 
of the new post of Minister for Foreign Trade and Development Cooperation is an important step in 
this direction. In this discussion paper, however, we contend that more ambitious and far-reaching 
reforms are both possible and essential if the required level of coherence and effectiveness is to be 
achieved.  
 

3.1. A new agenda with broad support  
The great diversity of international actors (governments, NGOs, international organizations, major 
philanthropists, religious organizations, companies and private individuals), together with the 
increasing urgency of many global and distribution issues, demands a new, overarching approach to 
international cooperation. In view of the political reality and the challenges which the Netherlands 
now faces, it is no longer appropriate to view development cooperation as a narrow government task, 
but as a broad ‘national commitment’ based on a broad agenda. The proposed system embraces not 
only traditional development aid (and the relevant budget), but also efforts in the areas of peace, 
security and sustainability. The discussion of the ‘ODA norm’ is thus placed in a new context, which 
includes the Netherlands’ contribution to resolving global issues as part of the international 
community.  
 
Given the scale and urgency of the global challenges, traditional ODA is not adequately equipped to 
address issues such as climate change and financial instability. To do so calls for further resources, 
different financing forms and closer international cooperation. Severino and Ray (2009), researchers 
at the American Center for Global Development, use the term ‘global policy finance’. They 
differentiate between financing economic convergence, financing access to basic welfare (through ODA 
or ODA-like channels) and financing (the management of) global public goods. Figure 3 offers an 
example of how activities within these three areas can be financed by different societal actors. This 
concept notwithstanding, ODA currently remains the only mechanism for financing international 
cooperation which can rely on broad support. In time, the principle of ODA must be replaced or 
supplemented. Until that happens, it is crucial to observe the existing international agreements.  

 
Figure 3: The pillars of Global Policy Finance (part of an illustration in Severino & Ray, 2009) 

 
The three ‘pillars’ proposed by Severino and Ray also offer a foundation for the development of the 
proposed ‘national commitment to international cooperation’. Within this system, the Dutch ODA 
budget, together with donations from the general public, the business community and the lotteries, 
will be channelled through organizations dedicated to international development. The international 
efforts of other ministries concerned with social, economic and economic sustainability will also form 
part of the broad international cooperation agenda. The Ministry of Infrastructure and the 
Environment, for example, has certain responsibilities with regard to climate change, while the 
Ministry of Defence is concerned with peace and security. Violent conflicts form one of the most 



10 / 21 
 

serious obstacles to development, and the Netherlands itself will benefit from there being a stable, just 
and peaceful world. Ideally, all foreign policy which falls under the HGIS budget (Homogenous Group 
for International Cooperation) will be organized in a coherent way according to the three pillars of 
economic convergence, access to basic human welfare and the management of global public goods.  
 
In practice, the Netherlands’ contribution to development cooperation exceeds the established ODA 
norm of 0.7% of GDP. According to the European Centre for Development Policy Management 
(ECDPM), the Netherlands’ total expenditure on development-related matters was in the order of 13 
billion dollars in 2010, almost 1.7% of GDP. This figure includes both the official government funding 
flows and the private flows (Van Heukelom et al., 2012). If we consider only the current (2012) ODA 
budget (2012), private donations, remittances by non-Western migrants, the international efforts of 
the Ministry of Infrastructure and the Environment, and the costs2 incurred by the Ministry of Defence 
in undertaking international peace-keeping missions, the total Dutch commitment to international 
cooperation is somewhat less at approximately 0.9% of GDP. Although the official development aid 
budget still represents the lion’s share of this amount, the announced reduction in government 
expenditure means that its contribution to a future ‘national commitment’ will be somewhat lower.  
 

National Commitment (government and private)  Absolute in euros 

Official development assistance (ODA)  4,340,000,000 

Defence (crisis control operations and attachés) 233,996,000 

HGIS (non-ODA): climate, water management, etc.  124,272,000 

Private donations intended for international aid  572,000,000 

Remittances 300,000,000 

Total  5,570,268,000 

 
Figure 4: Breakdown of minimum National Commitment for international cooperation  

 
In financial terms, the Netherlands’ current commitment to international cooperation is estimated to 
be between 0.9% and 1.7% of GDP. The components shown in the above table will primarily benefit 
economic convergence and access to basic human welfare, with a somewhat lesser effect in terms of 
the management of global public goods. Given the urgency of issues such as climate change and 
financial instability, it is crucial that the Netherlands adopts a far more ambitious approach in this 
area. Inge Kaul et al. (2003) point out that huge amounts are already being devoted to the 
management of global public goods, but that doing nothing will cost far more. As Figure 5 shows, the 
costs of addressing the global issues cited (310 billion dollars) are considerably lower than the 
potential costs of ignoring them (2,586 billion dollars).  
 

Annual 
costs ($) 
of… 

Financial 
stability 

Multilateral 
trade 

Avoidable 
disease  

Stable 
climate 

Peace and 
security  

Inaction 50 bn  260 bn 1138 bn 780 bn 358 bn 

Corrective 
action 

0,5 bn 20 bn 93 bn 125 bn 71 bn 

 
Figure 5: Costs of inaction and corrective action with regard to global public goods (Kaul et al., 2003) 

 
The figures in the above table date from 2003. The United Nations has since estimated that the 
stabilization of climate change alone will demand a contribution of 1% of GDP. It is therefore clear that 
0.9% of GDP, derived from all sources public and private, will not be enough to finance an integrated 
response to poverty, sustainability and economic development. ODA and similar flows will remain 
essential in combating poverty and inequality, but the current level of ODA expenditure represents 
only a small fraction of the resources needed to administer the global public goods effectively. This 
applies not only to the Netherlands, but to the combined international expenditure of all countries.  
 

                                                             
2 The Ministry of Defence distinguishes between ‘fixed’ costs of maintaining manpower and resources, and the 
additional costs of specific missions, such as staffing allowances, equipment repairs, storage, etc. The table 
includes only these additional costs.  



11 / 21 
 

The current economic situation makes it very difficult to release more funds for international 
development, but innovative financing instruments and improved coherence offer viable alternatives. 
It is essential that the resources available are used more effectively, since the Netherlands will be 
affected by all the global issues sooner or later.  
  

3.2. Restructuring the aid channels  
The development cooperation budget represents a substantial proportion of the overall HGIS budget, 
which covers all government expenditure in matters of foreign policy. The development cooperation 
budget for 2012 has been set at 4.34 billion euros, of which 28% is earmarked for bilateral aid and 29% 
for multilateral contributions. It is likely that this ‘split’ will alter in the years ahead since it would be 
impractical to spread the planned 25% cutback in overall expenditure evenly across all channels.  
 

28%

29%

20%

9%

2%
12%

Distribution of ODA by channel (2012)
Bilateral

Multilateral

Civil society
organisations

Business

EKI

Other

 
 

Figure 6: Distribution of ODA by channel (BBO, 2012) 

 
The proposed ‘national commitment to international cooperation’ assumes that the distribution of 
funds via the various channels will be revised. Not every channel is suited to meeting specific 
objectives. Based on Severino and Ray’s three pillars of Global Policy (Figure 3), each pillar or 
objective can be directly linked to the most appropriate channel. Multilateral cooperation, for example, 
will provide the opportunities to address sustainability issues and manage the global public goods. 
Bilateral aid offers opportunities for cooperation in areas in which the donor countries have some 
special expertise. In the case of the Netherlands, those areas include agriculture, water, justice and 
jurisprudence, HIV/Aids and good governance. Other topics might better be left to other bilateral 
donors or the multilateral organizations. The civil-lateral channel deserves special attention. The role 
of civil society organizations in development cooperation is changing, but remains essential. As noted 
by the AIV (2012), bilateral development aid will become less significant in the emerging economies in 
the light of their strong domestic growth. At the same time, poverty and inequality will continue to be 
major problems in these countries. Those civil society organizations which are concerned with capacity 
building and strengthening the societal midfield will therefore have a particularly important part to 
play in addressing distribution issues. Moreover, civil society organizations represent added value in 
that they can provide aid in fragile states and conflict zones. Here, multilateral aid (other than direct 
food aid and help for refugees) is often too cumbersome an instrument. Where there is no fully 
functioning government apparatus, bilateral aid can often achieve relatively little. Civil society 
organizations are therefore best equipped to provide the necessary relief and assistance.  



12 / 21 
 

 

4. Global citizenship: the contribution of the 
various actors  

As noted above, the government is not the only actor involved in the Netherlands’ international 
cooperation efforts. Private sector companies, the major philanthropists and members of the public 
and others are increasingly connected with each other and with their counterparts worldwide. 
Countless Dutch citizens are actively helping to create a better world. This is very important, since 
governments’ efforts alone are not enough, in either quantity or quality, to provide an effective 
response to global issues such as climate change, scarcity and financial instability. The contribution 
which individuals, companies, philanthropists, religious organizations and others are making to 
international cooperation can, however, be used more effectively.  
 

4.1. Individuals 
The Dutch public are actively involved with the rest of the world in many ways. They give generously to 
good causes. According to VU University Amsterdam, in 2009 Dutch charities received private 
donations (including those from individuals, companies and lotteries) totalling 4.7 billion euros. Of 
this amount, 12% (572 million euros) was specifically intended to support international aid (Schuyt, 
2011). It should however be noted that some of the donations to church institutions (representing 19% 
of the total) and to organizations concerned with the environment (9%) also support international 
cooperation, either directly or indirectly.  
 
The IS Barometer 2011 reveals that 75% of Dutch citizens made some contribution to development 
cooperation in 2010. This contribution can take various forms: donations of goods (40%), spontaneous 
financial donations (37%), taking part in a lottery (36%) or purchasing Fairtrade products (31%) 
(Hento, 2011). The international concern of the Dutch public is evident not only from general 
consumer behaviour, but in general attitudes: 64% consider development cooperation to be important, 
a significant majority (74%) follow the news about global issues, and approximately 75% regularly 
discuss poverty and environmental issues (Carabain, Van Gent & Boonstoppel, 2012).  
 
Migrants make a contribution to Dutch society but also contribute to the development of their country 
of origin through their ‘remittances’: money sent to their family. An NCDO study shows that non-
Western migrants from the Antilles, Morocco Suriname and Turkey were responsible for a total of 300 
million euros in such remittances in 2009 (Carabain, 2011). This figure is broadly in line with an 
earlier estimate by the Ministry of Finance, which concluded that direct remittances to Surinam, 
Turkey, Morocco, the Antilles, Ghana and Somalia totalled approximately 365 million euros in 2005.  
 
Last but not least, many Dutch citizens devote their time and energy to international cooperation 
efforts. MyWorld, the platform for private development cooperation initiatives, reports that there are 
some eight thousand volunteer organizations in the Netherlands working to create a better world. The 
sector organization Partos states that its 93 members have between 2,500 and 3,000 fulltime (or 
fulltime equivalent) professional staff. To this figure we must add the vast number of volunteers 
working for good causes. The country’s 350 ‘Wereldwinkel’ shops are run by no fewer than 12,500 
volunteers. This demonstrates broad acceptance of the notion that international cooperation is not 
solely a matter for the government, but relies on the concerted efforts of society at large.  
 

4.2. The private sector  
Private sector companies’ trading practices and production methods play an important part in 
economic and social development, welfare and sustainability. The Advisory Council on International 
Affairs (2012) identifies two specific roles for the private sector: to promote the adoption of legislation 
intended to improve the business climate, and to promote socially responsible enterprise, with 
particular reference to chain responsibility. Many large Dutch companies, including Heineken, DSM 
and Unilever, are making an important contribution to sustainability and welfare throughout the 
world. Rabobank has invested in local African banks, enabling them to offer their services to a broader 
public using mobile phone ‘apps’ and the internet. This type of initiative is crucial to welfare and the 
development of societal systems.  
 



13 / 21 
 

As noted above, the Dutch private sector is investing many billions of euros in companies in the 
developing countries. Although such foreign direct investment is indeed very important in terms of 
economic development, there are potential hazards. The money could be used to fund ‘perverse 
practices’, such as misappropriation of land and environmental pollution. It is therefore crucial that 
the European regulations governing ‘Coherence of Policy’ (whereby national policy must not frustrate 
or undermine development in other countries) are implemented and observed. It will then be possible 
to use foreign direct investments and trade policy as effective development instruments. There is, of 
course, government policy governing taxes, trade, natural resources, fisheries, agriculture and 
countless other aspects of business. However, all Dutch companies must go beyond the formal rules to 
ensure that their international activities promote sustainability and human rights to the greatest 
extent possible. They must also impose contractual terms and conditions to ensure that their suppliers 
do likewise. The guidelines produced by the OECD provide a useful point of departure.  
 

4.3. The major philanthropists  
According to the Dutch Wealth Report (2012), 1.3% of Dutch households have a net worth in excess of 
one million euros. The ‘average’ Dutch millionaire has assets of 2.9 million and as a group the 
millionaires own 39% of the country’s wealth (Van Lanschot, 2012). Millionaires tend to donate to 
ideological causes, medical research and international aid. Their average annual charity contribution is 
2,763 euros, thirteen times higher than the ‘man in the street’. Donations exceeding 25,000 euros are 
rare, made by only 2% of the millionaire group (VU University Amsterdam, 2011).  
 
Unlike the United States, the Netherlands has very few major philanthropists who choose to support 
international cooperation. There is no Dutch Gates, Gates, Rockefeller or Ford. Nevertheless, there are 
a number of large donors, including the Van Leer Foundation which administers the trust set up by the 
late industrialist Bernard van Leer. Each year it donates some 4.5% of current assets (approximately 
800 million euros in 2008) to good causes, mostly in countries other than the Netherlands. As long 
ago as 2008, Rien van Gendt, executive trustee of the Van Leer Foundation, noted that the 
government’s withdrawal from development cooperation created more room for private philanthropic 
initiatives which could often achieve better results.  
 

4.4. Civil society organizations  
Civil society organizations have a crucial role to play in international cooperation, in both the emerging 
economies and the fragile states. Such organizations also have great added value in the Netherlands: 
they raise public awareness of issues such as sustainable consumption and fair trade. For example, 
Oxfam Novib recently ran a successful campaign to ensure that the chocolate traditionally given to 
mark ‘Sinterklaas’ is from certified Fairtrade sources.  
 

http://www.rnw.nl/nederlands/article/de-invloed-van-filantroop-rien-van-gendt


14 / 21 
 

 

5. Prerequirements and policy recommendations 

The proposed broad approach is appropriate to the changing field of international cooperation, but 
cannot be achieved without stronger government coordination and a suitably ambitious agenda for all 
ministries and departments. Severino and Ray (2009) point to the ongoing fragmentation of the 
development sector and describe a transition from collective action to ‘hypercollective action’. In 
future, the Western governments will not be in sole charge: those of the south, civil society 
organizations, small-scale private initiatives, major philanthropists, the business community and the 
general public will all come to play a more prominent part in the changing international cooperation 
arena. Although it is desirable for each actor to have a well-defined and specific role, there are a 
number of aspects which demand government coordination. Without any form of coordination, the 
various efforts may well prove counterproductive.  
 
Further multilateralization is required to provide an effective response to the current global 
challenges. This applies equally at the European level. Aspects which call for coordination and 
strategic management by the government include climate change mitigation and adaptation, 
arrangements for asylum seekers, international health care and global public health. There are various 
other global public goods whose stewardship cannot be left entirely to the private sector: international 
security, clean oceans, international justice and financial stability, to name but a few. Similarly, the 
international framework for poverty reduction is a matter for coordinated government intervention, 
particularly in terms of fair trade and sustainable production. The Sustainable Development Goals 
adopted by the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development (‘Rio+20’) offer opportunities 
to create an international framework and a fully integrated approach to sustainable development and 
poverty reduction.  
 

5.1. Recommendations  
The desired coordination should not only ensure that the Netherlands’ contribution supplements the 
international efforts of organizations such as the UN and EU, but that the contribution itself, including 
the deployment of Dutch expertise, is fully visible. This is in our own interests. Coordination is also 
required to ensure that national policy is fully in line with that of other countries, in all relevant policy 
fields. We therefore present ten recommendations for the reform of international cooperation policy 
and strategy.  
1. Replace the term ‘official development assistance’ with ‘national commitment to international 

cooperation’. This will make clear that all ministries and departments are involved in the 
government’s international cooperation efforts, and that other actors within society also have a 
significant role to play. Based on the combined contribution of the government, private sector 
and the general public, the Netherlands should provide a ‘national commitment’ of no less than 
2% of GDP. To ensure that resources (financial and otherwise) are used in a coherent and 
effective manner, the Netherlands should take an active role in international cooperation 
addressing economic convergence, access to basic welfare and the management of public goods. 
This will entail only a minor increase in the development-related public and private expenditure 
of 2010, which was assessed by the ECDPM (2012) to be just under 1.7% of GDP. Moreover, the 
additional resources need not necessarily be drawn from the governmental budget but can be 
raised by means of innovative financing mechanisms (see Recommendation 8, below) and 
through the more effective use of foreign direct investments. 
  

2. Invest in better coordination and coherence of policy. This is perhaps the most important 
recommendation of all: there can be no effective national programme without coherent policy. 
That policy must address not only the government’s own activities in areas such as trade and 
agriculture, but also aspects such as companies’ production processes and consumer behaviour. 
If the Netherlands is to deploy its expertise where it is needed, and to do so as efficiently as 
possible, coherent international policy is absolutely essential. It forms the very basis of effective 
international cooperation.  
 

3. Devise a broad agenda for international cooperation. Many people associate the term 
‘development cooperation’ primarily with poverty reduction. However, global welfare relies on 
more than economic development alone: it demands attention for sustainability and the creation 
of social amenities. The implementation of the agreements made at Rio+20 with regard to 



15 / 21 
 

promoting a sustainable economy will do much to create a broad agenda for international 
cooperation: non-sustainable behaviour in one region or country has a negative impact in others. 
It is not only governments which must realize this, but all sections of society. By implementing the 
principles of the green economy at home, we shall create room for growth in the developing 
countries.  

 
4. Multilateral cooperation should be made more prominent. The issues of distribution and 

management of public goods cannot be solved through bilateral aid alone. Despite its 
shortcomings, multilateral cooperation remains essential if such issues are to be addressed in a 
structured manner. Any intensification of multilateral cooperation should however be 
accompanied by the reform and strengthening of the relevant organizations and channels. As the 
Advisory Council on International Affairs noted in 2012, trilateral cooperation between the West, 
emerging economies and developing countries offers opportunities to work alongside the middle-
income countries to enhance policy coherence and ensure that the global public goods are duly 
protected.  

 
5. Work on international cooperation at the European level. The European Union is one of the three 

largest economic powers in the world, and is the largest donor in the field of development 
cooperation. Like that of the Netherlands, the general prosperity of the EU is heavily reliant on 
developments in the rest of the world, and vice versa. For reasons of efficiency and effectiveness, it 
is essential for the Netherlands and the other member states to work together in their 
international cooperation efforts. Ideally, a pan-European policy will be developed, based on the 
principles of coherence, coordination and complementarity, with the specialist implementation of 
that policy taking place at the national level.  

 
6. Focus on the fragile states. To date, the reforms of Dutch development policy have led to a 

stronger focus on the productive sectors and on economic diplomacy designed to bring mutual 
benefits. This detracts attention from the fragile states because they offer too few economic 
opportunities and represent too high a risk. However, it is essential that the Netherlands continues 
its efforts to strengthen the fragile states, preferably in a multilateral context. It is precisely these 
countries, Mali being just one example, which are now faced with complex economic, ecological 
and social problems for which bilateral relationships alone cannot offer permanent solutions. 
Coordination between all donors is highly desirable: they should act in concert wherever possible.  

 
7. The response to climate change should be given higher priority. The global response to climate 

change seems to have reached an impasse; the agreements in place are not being observed, while 
diplomatic wranglings are frustrating efforts to arrive at new agreements. It is, however, crystal 
clear that a stable climate is to everyone’s advantage, and is particularly important to low-lying 
delta regions such as the Netherlands. The Dutch government must therefore continue to press for 
an effective global response to climate change. Meanwhile, it should implement all possible 
mitigation and adaptation measures further to national and European policy.  

 
8. Implement innovative financing mechanisms. Innovative financing instruments have been 

successfully applied in international health care for several years. There are many opportunities to 
use similar arrangements to support the management of global public goods. The Netherlands 
could, for example, follow France’s example and impose a ‘solidarity levy’ on air tickets. Other 
possibilities include ‘meso-loans’ for small and medium enterprises, and peer-to-peer loans 
between companies or NGOs. It also seems prudent to channel revenue raised by the proposed 
Financial Transaction Tax (FTT) into a European fund to be used for climate mitigation. In the 
absence of adequate international policy, this represents a ‘quick win’.  

 
9. Acknowledge the need for ‘disparallel space’. Policy governing foreign trade must not stand in the 

way of economic development in the poorer countries; vulnerable economies should be given extra 
space. The developing countries might, for example, be permitted to introduce market protection 
measures on a temporary basis, while the Western countries open their markets to all. Moreover, 
the developing countries should be given better access to (intellectual) property rights, not least in 
the area of health care and prescription drugs. Based on the principle of reciprocity, it is not 
morally defensible to monopolize knowledge when large groups of people face life-threatening 
diseases, climate risks and major economic challenges..  

 



16 / 21 
 

10. Peace-keeping operations must continue as an intrinsic part of international cooperation. War 
and conflict form a serious obstacle to progress, and can quickly negate any gains already made. 
Violence in any form precludes the development of ecological, social and economic sustainability. 
The people of South Sudan have been forced to rebuild their lives time after time; sustainable 
progress is virtually impossible. Those who cannot sow cannot reap.  

 



17 / 21 
 

 
6. A new role for DGIS  

International cooperation when undertaken by Dutch society as a whole demands strategic 
management and visionary policy. Ideally, the Directorate-General for International Cooperation 
(DGIS), part of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, will provide both. In addition to administering the ODA 
budget, it will then have two key tasks, both of which involve coordination. The first is at the 
interdepartmental level, whereby DGIS will ensure effective use of the resources and manpower of 
other departments and oversee policy coherence. The second task is equally important; DGIS can 
create appropriate frameworks and facilitate the role of the societal midfield. If international 
cooperation is to become a matter for society at large, there must also be a broad dialogue, with the 
various actors receiving the necessary encouragement. This too is an appropriate task for DGIS.  
 
The current issues within the international cooperation arena are not confined to the traditional 
portfolio of Foreign Affairs but involve many areas of policy. It is therefore essential that the 
government has an international development agenda which involves all relevant ministries and 
departments. The decision to create the new post of Minister for Foreign Trade and Development 
Cooperation must be applauded, all the more so because its holder forms part of the cabinet itself. All 
officials and policy makers must take into account the influence of the European Union, both as a 
source of policy and a partner. Similarly, the multilateral system must no longer be compartmentalized 
and hidden away within the DGIS apparatus, but ‘mainstreamed’ whereby the relationship with each 
of the international policy fields is recognized and respected. An innovative approach to international 
cooperation policy will enable the Netherlands to establish a strong profile on the international stage, 
an opportunity which must not be allowed to pass. Accordingly, DGIS must be given the mandate and 
the resources needed to re-establish the Netherland’s reputation as a leader in international 
cooperation.  
 
The proposed new approach to international cooperation demands a new set of skills and 
competencies. Overseas diplomatic missions will also play a key part in implementing the new agenda, 
taking on the role of ‘broker’ between local actors and the public and private sectors in the 
Netherlands. To ensure that this task is fulfilled properly, it is important to investigate the role that the 
missions can continue to play in the former partner countries which have now achieved economic 
independence. Hopefully, the Netherlands will now be able to reap the rewards of our long 
relationships with these countries, and the knowledge and networks we have built over the course of 
many years.  
 
Main recommendations in terms of organization:  
1. Strengthening of DGIS. A broad approach to international cooperation demands a new, more 

prominent role for DGIS. It must become a recognizable and visionary coordination centre with 
a clear mandate, along the lines of the United Kingdom’s Department for International 
Development (DFID). This entails a fundamental transformation of the organizational structure, 
as well as more effective use of the expertise made available by research institutes and 
‘thinktanks’ in the Netherlands and elsewhere.  
 

2. Competency development. The implementation of a successful national programme which enjoys 
the envisaged level of support demands new skills and competencies both within and beyond 
DGIS. The development of these competencies can be encouraged by the use of career columns, 
whereby promotion depends on both practical and theoretical expertise in areas such as 
implementation and evaluation.  

 
3. An interdepartmental agenda. The proposed new approach to international cooperation can only 

succeed if it enjoys the full support of all ministries and departments, all of which should be 
working according to the same coordinated agenda. The Minister for Overseas Trade and 
Development Cooperation must have the authority to devise, coordinate and if necessary correct 
the policy of other departments. This also entails greater authority in the budgetary context.  

 

 



18 / 21 
 

4. Organizing for emergence. When developing policy in general, and that addressing international 
cooperation in particular, it will be prudent to leave room for adaptation should new issues or 
developments emerge. For example, the final form of the post-Millennium Development Goals 
agenda remains unclear at this time, as does that of the post-Rio agenda. Similarly, the outcome of 
the international trade negotiations cannot be predicted with any degree of certainty. The principle 
of ‘organizing for emergence’ allows unforeseen developments to be accommodated.  

 
5. Interaction with the research field. The proposed restructuring of international cooperation 

efforts to become a national undertaking, and with it the ambition of taking a prominent and 
relevant place on the world stage, cannot be achieved without close cooperation between policy 
research and policy implementation. There must be an ongoing dialogue between the government, 
the private sector, the civil society, academics and researchers from the leading institutes. In other 
words, there must be intensive cooperation with the existing institutes, together with further 
development of the ‘knowledge platforms’ concerned with the spearheads of government policy 
and the ‘top economic sectors’. The Scientific Council for Government Policy has also called for 
academic involvement of a more general nature, whereby policy development can be linked to the 
research capacity in the Netherlands itself, and to relevant international developments. It would be 
possible for the existing institutes to fulfil this role within a network structure. In keeping with the 
contents of this discussion paper, the ‘golden triangle’ of private sector, government and the 
research field should be expanded to include the civil society organizations.  

 

Political support  
Although political discussions are currently dominated by the economic situation, there is clear 
support for the proposal of transforming and intensifying the Netherlands’ role in international 
cooperation. Prior to the general election of September 2012, NCDO analysed the various party 
manifestos and found that most were strongly in favour of retaining the development cooperation 
budget. The Christian Democrat Alliance, D66 and the Reformed Political Party (SGP) called for the 
budget to remain at its current level of 0.7% of GDP, while Labour, the Socialist Party (SP), Green Left, 
the Christian Union and the Party for the Animals wished to see the budget increased. Only the 
People’s Party for Democracy and Freedom (VVD) and the Party for Freedom (PVV) proposed a 
reduction in the budget. Most party manifestos also state that better policy coherence is required, 
which calls for efforts at the EU level. Labour, Green Left and the Christian Union draw attention to 
the need for an interdepartmental agenda.  

 



19 / 21 
 

 
7. Conclusion  

This discussion paper calls for a radical reform of the Netherlands’ approach to international 
cooperation, based on the principle of reciprocity. International cooperation whereby we assist other 
countries on their own path to development is undeniably in the Netherlands’ own national and 
economic interests. We may be an important trading nation, but geographically and demographically 
we are ‘small fry’. Our relationships with other countries are of great value in all senses of the word. 
Further international cooperation in the economic, social and ecological areas is essential to the 
Netherlands’ ongoing prosperity and the welfare of its people. The creation of a stable, just and 
sustainable world will greatly benefit Dutch society and the national economy.  
 
In a changing world full of new players, new systems and urgent global issues, the traditional bilateral 
form of international cooperation is no longer the most appropriate. It offers too few opportunities to 
address the complex and pressing issues within a particular country, and offers no response to wider 
problems such as financial instability, climate change, infectious diseases, etc. Further 
multilateralization is essential if we are to address today’s global sustainability issues effectively before 
it is too late. At the same time, the efforts of civil society organizations will remain crucial in tackling 
inequality in the middle-income countries and in providing emergency relief in fragile states.  
 
Efforts to reduce poverty and inequality remain essential in a world in which hundreds of millions of 
people are denied the benefits of globalization. Indeed, many have become the victims of globalization. 
The fragmentation of the development sector, in which not only governments but private sector 
companies, civil society organizations, philanthropists and individual members of the public are active, 
calls for a new and broader system of coordination. This will enable the activities of Dutch companies 
and individuals make a real difference in terms of welfare and well-being elsewhere in the world. 
Rather than focus exclusively on official development aid, the government must turn its attention to 
coordinating and facilitating a ‘national commitment’ which address the three pillars of economic 
convergence, access to basic welfare and the management of global public goods. The successful 
implementation of such a broad agenda will depend on there being fully coherent policy. Only then can 
the contribution of the various actors be used effectively and efficiently.  
 
To design, implement and direct this national programme demands a recognizable and visionary 
coordinator: a ‘spider in the web’. This will be the new role of DGIS. Skills and competences can be 
developed by means of career columns. If the Netherlands is able to modernize its policy and provide 
the necessary resources for international cooperation, it will once again assume the role of leader 
within Europe and indeed the wider international arena. This will greatly enhance its reputation and 
standing.  
 
The proposed threefold reform (policy innovation geared towards coherence, expansion to include 
society at large rather than the government alone, and professionalization to achieve better 
coordination) will have threefold gains. Foreign policy will be more efficient and coherent. The 
economic relationships with other countries will be strengthened, and the Netherlands will be able to 
reposition itself within the international arena. Moreover, the Netherlands and its people will be 
helping to create a just, sustainable and stable global society.  
 



20 / 21 
 

 
8. References 

African Economic Outlook. (2010). Public Resource Mobilisation and Aid 2010. Ontleend aan: 
http://www.africaneconomicoutlook.org/en/  
 
AIV. (2012) Ongelijke werelden: armoede, groei, ongelijkheid en de rol van internationale 
samenwerking. Den Haag: Adviesraad Internationale Vraagstukken  
 
BBO. (2012). Factsheet Pleinpraat 5 Maart. Den Haag: BBO  
 
Carabain, C.L. (2011). Het geefgedrag van niet-westerse allochtonen in Nederland 2009: Geven in 
Nederland en land van herkomst. Amsterdam: NCDO  
 
Carabain, C.L., M. van Gent & E. Boonstoppel. (2012). Nederlanders & Mondiaal Burgerschap 2012. 
Amsterdam: NCDO  
 
CBS. (2011). Internationalisation Monitor 2011. Den Haag: Centraal Bureau voor Statistiek. Ontleend 
aan: http://www.cbs.nl/nl-NL/menu/themas/internationale-
handel/publicaties/publicaties/archief/2011/2011-m21-2-eng-pub.htm 
 
DNB. (2011). Nederland wereldwijd koploper directe investeringen. Ontleend aan: 
http://www.dnb.nl/nieuws/nieuwsoverzicht-en-archief/dnbulletin-2011/dnb256487.jsp  
 
GHSi. (2012). Shifting Paradigm: How the BRICS are reshaping global health and development. New 
York: Global Health Strategies initiatives.  
 
Hento, I. (2011). Barometer Internationale Samenwerking 2011. Amsterdam: NCDO 
 
Kaul I., Conceicao, P., Le Goulven, K., en R. Mendoza. (2003). Providing Global Public Goods: 
Managing Globalization. New York: Oxford University Press 
 
Kenny, C. (2012). Do we still need development goals? Ontleend aan: 
http://blogs.cgdev.org/globaldevelopment/2012/02/do-we-still-need-development-goals.php  
 
Kharas, H. & Rogerson, A. (2012). Horizon 2025: creative destruction in the aid industry, Londen: 
Overseas Development Institute 
 
Melamed, C. (2011). Inequality: why it matters and what can be done. Brussel: ActionAid 
International 
 
Ministerie van Defensie. (2012). Rijksbegroting 2013: X Defensie. Den Haag: Ministerie van Defensie.  
 
MyWorld. (no date). Over MyWorld. Ontleend aan: http://www.myworld.nl/over-my-world/  
 
Nationale Postcode Loterij. (2012). Toewijzingen Nationale Postcode Loterij 2011. Amsterdam: 
Nationale Postcode Loterij 
 
NCDO. (2012). Analyse van de verkiezingsprogramma’s op internationale duurzaamheid en 
armoedebestrijding. Amsterdam: NCDO  
 
OECD. (2002). Official Development Assistance and Foreign Direct Investment. Paper voor Global 
Forum on International Investment. Shanghai 5-6 December. Ontleend aan: 
http://www.oecd.org/investment/investmentfordevelopment/2764550.pdf  
 
OECD. (2012). 2011 DAC Report on Multilateral Aid. Geneve: OECD. Ontleend aan: 
http://www.oecd.org/dac/aidarchitecture/49014277.pdf  
 

http://www.africaneconomicoutlook.org/en/
http://www.cbs.nl/nl-NL/menu/themas/internationale-handel/publicaties/publicaties/archief/2011/2011-m21-2-eng-pub.htm
http://www.cbs.nl/nl-NL/menu/themas/internationale-handel/publicaties/publicaties/archief/2011/2011-m21-2-eng-pub.htm
http://www.dnb.nl/nieuws/nieuwsoverzicht-en-archief/dnbulletin-2011/dnb256487.jsp
http://blogs.cgdev.org/globaldevelopment/2012/02/do-we-still-need-development-goals.php
http://www.myworld.nl/over-my-world/
http://www.oecd.org/investment/investmentfordevelopment/2764550.pdf
http://www.oecd.org/dac/aidarchitecture/49014277.pdf


21 / 21 
 

Reddy, S. (2012, 19 januari). IMF seeks more funds to gird for the Eurocrisis, Wallstreet Journal. 
Ontleend aan: 
http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052970204555904577168461757285158.html  
 
Roberts, C. (2011). Building the new world order BRIC by BRIC. The European Financial Review. 
February-March 2011 
http://www.mid.ru/brics.nsf/8aab06cc61208e47c325786800383727/0076861093dc5f86c32578bc0
045fca4/$FILE/Cynthia%20Roberts.pdf  
 
Schuyt, Th., Gouwenberg, B. &. R. Bekkers. (2011). Geven in Nederland: Giften, Nalatenschappen, 
Sponsoring en Vrijwilligerswerk. Amsterdam: Reed Business.  
 
Severino, J. M. & Ray, O. (2010). The End of ODA (II): The Birth of Hypercollective Action, (CGD 
Working Paper 218). Washington, D.C.: Center for Global Development. 
 
Sumner, A. (2010). Global poverty and the new bottom billion IDS Paper 349. Brighton: IDS. 
 
Sumner, A. (2012). Where will the poor live? An update on Global Poverty and the New Bottom 
Billion. Working paper 305. Washington: Center for Global Development.  
 
Tweede Kamer. (2012). HGIS-nota 2013. Vergaderstuk van de Tweede Kamer, vergaderjaar 2012-
2013, 33 401, nr. 2. Den Haag: Tweede Kamer. 
 
Van Heukelom, J. (2012). Reporting on Development: ODA and Financing for Development. 
Maastricht: ECDPM.  
 
Van Lanschot. (2012). Vermogen in Nederland: Dutch Wealth Report 2012. Den Bosch: Van Lanschot 
Bankiers. 
 
Wereldbank. (2010). The cost to developing countries of adaptation to climate change. Washington: 
Worldbank. Ontleend aan: http://siteresources.worldbank.org/EXTCC/Resources/EACC-
june2010.pdf 
 
Wereldbank. (2012). Migration and Remittances Factbook 2011. Washington: World bank 
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTLAC/Resources/Factbook2011-Ebook.pdf  
 
WRR. (2010). Minder pretentie, meer ambitie. Den Haag: Wetenschappelijke Raad voor het 
Regeringsbeleid.  
 
WWF. (2012). Living Planet Report 2012. Gland: World Wildlife Fund International  
 
 
 

http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052970204555904577168461757285158.html
http://www.mid.ru/brics.nsf/8aab06cc61208e47c325786800383727/0076861093dc5f86c32578bc0045fca4/$FILE/Cynthia%20Roberts.pdf
http://www.mid.ru/brics.nsf/8aab06cc61208e47c325786800383727/0076861093dc5f86c32578bc0045fca4/$FILE/Cynthia%20Roberts.pdf
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTLAC/Resources/Factbook2011-Ebook.pdf

