





































































































































































































































































































































































































Guidelines for 
Policy Makers on
Child Online 
Protection 

International Telecommunication Union
Place des Nations
CH-1211 Geneva 20
Switzerland
www.itu.int/cop

Printed in Switzerland
Geneva, 2009

(((

(((

(((

(((

CHIS     CHIS     
With the support of:

www.itu.int/cop



Legal notice 

This document may be updated from time to time.

Third-party sources are quoted as appropriate. The International Telecommunication Union (ITU) is not responsible for the content of  external 
sources including external websites referenced in this publication. 

Neither ITU nor any person acting on its behalf  is responsible for the use that might be made of  the information contained in this publication. 

Disclaimer 

Mention of  and references to specific countries, companies, products, initiatives or guidelines do not in any way imply that they are endorsed or 
recommended by ITU, the authors, or any other organization that the authors are affiliated with,  in preference to others of  a similar nature that 
are not mentioned.

Requests to reproduce extracts of  this publication may be submitted to: jur@itu.int

© International Telecommunication Union (ITU), 2009

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

These Guidelines have been prepared by the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) and a team of  contributing authors from leading institutions active 
in the information and communications technologies (ICT) sector and in child online safety issues. These Guidelines would not have been possible without the 
time, enthusiasm and dedication of  its contributing authors. 

ITU is grateful to all of  the following authors, who have contributed their valuable time and insights: (listed in alphabetical order)
• Cristina Bueti and Sandra Pandi (ITU)
• John Carr (Children’s Charities’ Coalition on Internet Safety) 
• Raoul Chiesa and Francesca Bosco (United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute)
• Catherine Cummings and Jessica Sarra (International Centre for Missing & Exploited Children)
• Johan Martens (Child Helpline International)
• Michael Moran (Interpol) 

The authors wish to thank Kristin Kvigne (Interpol) for her detailed review and comments. 

ITU wishes to acknowledge Salma Abbasi from eWWG for her valuable involvement in the Child Online Protection (COP) Initiative.  

Additional information and materials relating to these Draft Guidelines can be found at: http://www.itu.int/cop/ and will be updated on a regular basis.

If  you have any comments, or if  you would like to provide any additional information, please contact Ms. JeoungHee Kim at cop@itu.int Photo credits: www.shutterstock.com, Violaine Martin/ITU, Ahone Ayeh Njume-Ebong/ITU 



Guidelines for Policy Makers

Foreword 1

Executive Summary 3

Guidelines for Policy Makers 6
 Legal Framework
 Law Enforcement Resources and Reporting Mechanisms
 National Focus
 Education and Awareness Resources

1. Background 11

2. Children’s and Young People’s Use of the Internet 15
 Interactivity and User Generated Content
 Social Networking Sites
 Instant Messaging and Chat
 Peer-to-Peer File Exchange Programmes 

Table of Contents

Legal notice 

This document may be updated from time to time.

Third-party sources are quoted as appropriate. The International Telecommunication Union (ITU) is not responsible for the content of  external 
sources including external websites referenced in this publication. 

Neither ITU nor any person acting on its behalf  is responsible for the use that might be made of  the information contained in this publication. 

Disclaimer 

Mention of  and references to specific countries, companies, products, initiatives or guidelines do not in any way imply that they are endorsed or 
recommended by ITU, the authors, or any other organization that the authors are affiliated with,  in preference to others of  a similar nature that 
are not mentioned.

Requests to reproduce extracts of  this publication may be submitted to: jur@itu.int

© International Telecommunication Union (ITU), 2009

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

These Guidelines have been prepared by the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) and a team of  contributing authors from leading institutions active 
in the information and communications technologies (ICT) sector and in child online safety issues. These Guidelines would not have been possible without the 
time, enthusiasm and dedication of  its contributing authors. 

ITU is grateful to all of  the following authors, who have contributed their valuable time and insights: (listed in alphabetical order)
• Cristina Bueti and Sandra Pandi (ITU)
• John Carr (Children’s Charities’ Coalition on Internet Safety) 
• Raoul Chiesa and Francesca Bosco (United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute)
• Catherine Cummings and Jessica Sarra (International Centre for Missing & Exploited Children)
• Johan Martens (Child Helpline International)
• Michael Moran (Interpol) 

The authors wish to thank Kristin Kvigne (Interpol) for her detailed review and comments. 

ITU wishes to acknowledge Salma Abbasi from eWWG for her valuable involvement in the Child Online Protection (COP) Initiative.  

Additional information and materials relating to these Draft Guidelines can be found at: http://www.itu.int/cop/ and will be updated on a regular basis.

If  you have any comments, or if  you would like to provide any additional information, please contact Ms. JeoungHee Kim at cop@itu.int Photo credits: www.shutterstock.com, Violaine Martin/ITU, Ahone Ayeh Njume-Ebong/ITU 



Guidelines for Policy Makers

3. Child Abuse Material 21
	 A	Definition
 Harmonization of  Laws
 Forensic Computer Training for Law Enforcement 
 International Cooperation and Data Sharing 
 Reporting Requirements 
 Reducing the Availability of  Child Abuse Images 

4. Key Risks to Children Online 35
 Content 
 Contact
 Conduct 
 Commerce 
 Excessive use 
 Societal

5. Addressing the Risks 39
 A National Checklist
 Comprehensive Legal Framework
 Need for a National Focus on Online Child Protection
	 Need	to	Develop	Local	Resources	Which	Reflect	National	Laws	and	Local	Cultural	Norms
  Need for Public Education and Awareness Activities. 
 Need for Reporting Mechanisms for Online Predatory Behavior, Including Bullying
 Helping Children to Stay Safer Through the Use of  Technical Tools
 

www.itu.int/cop



Guidelines for Policy Makers

6. Stakeholders 47
 Children and Young People 
 Parents, Guardians and Educators
 Industry
 The Research Community and NGOs
 Law Enforcement
 Social Services

7. Conclusion 51
Appendix 1
 Contact Offences Against Children and Young People 

Appendix 2
 Child Pornography: Model Legislation & Global Review  

Appendix 3
 Child Safety Software

Appendix 4
 Developing a National Strategy



www.itu.int/cop

Guidelines for Policy Makers

“Protecting children online 
is a global issue, so a global 
response is needed”



www.itu.int/cop

Guidelines for Policy Makers

Dr Hamadoun I. Touré 
Secretary-General of  the International Telecommunication Union (ITU)

Foreword

I welcome this opportunity to share with you these guidelines 
which have been developed with the invaluable help of  multiple 
stakeholders.

Child Online Protection – in the era of  the massively-available 
broadband Internet – is a critical issue that urgently requires a global, 
coordinated response. While local and even national initiatives 
certainly have their place, the Internet knows no boundaries, and an 
international cooperation will be the key to our success in winning 
the battles ahead.

Policy	makers	are	key	to	winning	the	fight	against	cybercrime	and	
cyberthreats, and I am personally grateful for your support.



UN	Convention	on	the	Rights	of 	the	Child	defines	a	child	as	being	any	person	under	the	age	of 	18.	These	Guidelines	address	issues	facing	all	
persons	under	the	age	of 	18	in	all	parts	of 	the	world.	However,	a	young	Internet	user	of 	7	years	of 	age	is	very	unlikely	to	have	the	same	needs	
or	interests	as	a	12	year	old	just	starting	at	High	School	or	a	17	year	old	on	the	brink	of 	adulthood.	At	different	points	in	the	Guidelines	the	
authors	have	tailored	the	advice	or	recommendations	to	fit	these	different	contexts.	Whilst	using	broad	categories	can	act	as	a	useful	guide	it	
should never be forgotten that, in the end, each child is different. Moreover there are many different local legal and cultural factors which could 
have an important bearing on how these Guidelines might be used or interpreted in any given country or region.

There is now a substantial body of  international law and international instruments which underpins and in many cases mandates action to 
protect	children	both	generally,	and	also	specifically	in	relation	to	the	internet.	Those	laws	and	instruments	form	the	basis	of 	these	Guidelines.	
They are comprehensively summarized in the Rio de Janeiro Declaration and Call for Action to Prevent and Stop Sexual Exploitation of  Chil-
dren	and	Adolescents	adopted	at	the	3rd	World	Congress	against	the	Sexual	Exploitation	of 	Children	and	Adolescents,	in	November,	2008.	



Guidelines for Policy Makers

Executive Summary
A decade ago, approximately 
182	million	people	accessed	the	
Internet globally — and almost 
all of  them lived in the devel-
oped world. Remarkably, by early 
2009,	there	were	over	1.5	billion	
Internet users worldwide, with 
over	400	million	of 	those	hav-
ing access to broadband. Today, 
while not ubiquitous, Internet 
users are truly worldwide with 
over	600	million	users	in	Asia,	
130	million	in	Latin	America	and	
the	Caribbean,	and	50	million	in	
Africa1. The Internet continues 
to be a dynamic and incredible 
resource with almost unlimited 
capabilities to address societal 
problems from improved access 
to healthcare to remote learning 
opportunities to e-government 

to innovative and higher pay-
ing	jobs.	However,	the	growing	
global issues surrounding online 
cybersecurity require a global re-
sponse, especially when it comes 
to the protection of  our young-
est and most vulnerable digital 
citizens: our children. 

According to recent surveys, 
over	60	per	cent	of 	children	and	
young people talk in chat rooms 
on a daily basis. Three out of  
four children online are willing 
to share personal information 
about themselves and their fam-
ily in exchange for goods and 
services and as many as one in 
five	children	could	be	targeted	by	
a predator each year.

These Guidelines have been 
prepared in the context of  the 
Child Online Protection (COP)2 
Initiative in order to establish the 
foundations for a safe and secure 
cyberworld for future generations. 
They are meant to act as a blue-
print which can be adapted and 
used in a way which is consistent 
with national or local customs and 
laws. Moreover, it will be appreci-
ated that these guidelines address 
issues which might affect all chil-
dren and young people under the 
age	of 	18	but	each	age	group	will	
have different needs.

The Guidelines have been de-
veloped by ITU in a very collab-
orative way involving a team of  
contributing authors from leading 
institutions active in the ICT sec-
tor and in child online safety 

1 World	Telecommunication/ICT	Indicators	Database	2008,	12th	Edition
2 www.itu.int/cop

1



4



Guidelines for Policy Makers

issues, namely, Children’s Chari-
ties’ Coalition on Internet Safety 
(CHIS), Child Helpline Interna-
tional (CHI), International Centre 
for Missing & Exploited Children 
(ICMEC), Interpol and United 
Nations Interregional Crime and 
Justice Research Institute (UNI-
CRI). Invaluable contributions 
were also received from indi-
vidual national governments and 
high- tech companies who share a 
common	objective	of 	making	the	
Internet a better and safer place 
for children and young people. 

It is hoped that these Guidelines 
will not only lead to the building 
of  a more inclusive information 

society, but also enable ITU Mem-
ber States to meet their obliga-
tions towards protecting and real-
izing the rights of  children as laid 
out in the UN Convention on the 
Rights of  the Child3, adopted by 
UN General Assembly resolution 
44/25	of 	20	November	1989	and	
the World Summit on Informa-
tion Society4 (WSIS) Outcomes 
Document5. 

At WSIS, ITU was entrusted 
by leaders of  the international 
community	with	Action	Line	C5:	
“building	confidence	and	security	
in the use of  ICTs”.  The WSIS 
outcomes	also	specifically	recog-

3 www.unicef.org/crc/
4  WSIS	was	held	in	two	phases:	in	Geneva	(10-12	December	2003)	and	in	Tunis	(16-18	November	2005).		

WSIS concluded with a bold commitment “to build a people-centred, inclusive and development oriented 
information society, where everyone can create, access, utilize and share information and knowledge.”  See 
www.itu.int/wsis.

5	 www.itu.int/wsis

nized the needs of  children and 
young people and their protection 
in cyberspace.  The Tunis Com-
mitment recognized “the role of  
ICTs in the protection of  children 
and in enhancing the develop-
ment of  children” as well as the 
need to “strengthen action to 
protect children from abuse and 
defend their rights in the context 
of  ICTs”.

Through issuing these Guidelines, 
the COP Initiative calls upon 
all stakeholders to promote the 
adoption of  policies and strategies 
that will protect children in cy-
berspace and promote their safer 
access to all the extraordinary op-
portunities online resources can 
provide.

 3



Guidelines for Policy Makers

4

Guidelines for Policy Makers
In order to formulate a national strategy focusing on online child safety, policy makers need to consider a range of  strate-
gies. Below are a number of  key areas for consideration. Further suggestions will also be found in Appendix 4.

# Key Areas for Consideration

Legal 
Framework 

1. Review the existing legal framework to determine that all necessary legal powers exist to enable 
law	enforcement	and	other	relevant	agencies	to	protect	persons	under	the	age	of 	18	online	on	all	
Internet-enabled platforms. 

2. Establish, mutatis mutandis, that any act against a child which is illegal in the real world is illegal 
online and that the online data protection and privacy rules for legal minors are also adequate.

Law 
Enforcement 
Resources 
and Reporting 
Mechanisms

3. Ensure that a mechanism is established and is widely promoted to provide a readily understood 
means for reporting illegal content found on the Internet, for example, a national hotline which 
has the capacity to respond rapidly and have illegal material removed or rendered inaccessible.

www.itu.int/cop



Guidelines for Policy Makers

5

6 A “PC Bang” is term commonly used in South Korea and in some other countries to describe a large room 
where a LAN facilitates large scale game playing, either online or between players in the room.

# Key Areas for Consideration

National 
Focus

4. Draw together all of  the relevant stakeholders with an interest in online child safety, in particular:
•	 Government agencies
•	 Law enforcement
•	 Social services organizations
•	 Internet Service Providers (ISPs) and other Electronic Service Providers (ESPs)
•	 Mobile phone network providers
•	 Other relevant hi-tech companies 
•	 Teacher organizations
•	 Parent organizations
•	 Children and young people
•	 Child protection and other relevant NGOs
•	 Academic and research community
•	 Owners of  Internet cafés and other public access providers e.g. libraries, telecentres, PC 

Bangs6 and online gaming centres etc.
5. Consider the advantages that a self  or co-regulatory policy development model might present, 

as expressed by the formulation and publication of  codes of  good practice, both in terms 
of  helping to engage and sustain the involvement of  all relevant stakeholders and in terms 
of  enhancing the speed with which appropriate responses to technological change can be 
formulated and put into effect.

Education and 
Awareness 
Resources

6. Draw on the knowledge and experience of  all stakeholders and develop Internet safety messages 
and	materials	which	reflect	local	cultural	norms	and	laws	and	ensure	that	these	are	efficiently	
distributed and appropriately presented to all key target audiences. Consider enlisting the aid 
of  the mass media in promoting awareness messages. Develop materials which emphasise the 
positive and empowering aspects of  the Internet for children and young people and avoid fear-
based messaging. Promote positive and responsible forms of  online behaviour.

7. Consider	the	role	that	technical	tools	such	as	filtering	programmes	and	child	safety	software	can	
play in supporting and supplementing education and awareness initiatives.

8. Encourage users to take responsibility for their computers by encouraging regular servicing 
which	includes	updates	of 	the	operating	system	plus	the	installation	and	upgrading	of 	a	firewall	
and antivirus application.



www.itu.int/cop



www.itu.int/cop

Guidelines for Policy Makers

Background
The technology which today we 
refer to as “the Internet” can 
trace	its	origins	back	to	the	1950s	
and beyond. However, it was 
the development of  the World 
Wide	Web	in	the	early	1990s	that	
sparked the exponential growth 
of  the Internet which led to it 
becoming an extremely valuable 
aspect of  our lives, both economi-
cally and socially, and has led it to 
become a seemingly permanent 
feature of  modern day life. 

At the dawn of  the Internet revo-
lution, users were amazed at the 
possibility of  contacting people 
and accessing information across 
oceans and time zones through 
a few clicks of  their mouse.  In 
order to do so, however, typically 
they	had	to	be	in	a	fixed	location	
in front of  an often large or bulky 
computer device, typically a PC. 
Today people can connect to the 

global network using a mobile 
phone, a laptop computer or 
other portable devices, often with 
video capabilities and very high-
speed access. Many game consoles 
are also Internet enabled and this 
has fostered a huge growth in on-
line game playing among children 
and young people. 

It	took	around	20	years	to	reach	
the	first	billion	mobile	phone	us-
ers, yet the second billion signed 
up	in	just	the	last	few	years.	In	
contrast,	it	took	125	years	to	
reach	the	first	billion	fixed-line	
telephone users.

The evolution from second to 
third generation mobile phone 
networks	is	arguably	just	as	
important	as	the	initial	jump	
from analogue to digital. It began 
more than a decade ago and is 
progressing at a rapid speed. The 

1.
7



www.itu.int/cop

“Draw together all of the 
relevant stakeholders with 
an interest in online child 
safety” 



www.itu.int/cop

Guidelines for Policy Makers

newly emerging fourth-generation 
technologies maintain the em-
phasis on mobile access but at 
even higher speeds. Broadband 
networks and media convergence 
are generating new avenues for 
distributing digital entertainment. 

User devices are now multi-func-
tional and increasingly personal-
ized.  In the near future, advances 
in connected computing will make 
it possible for hundreds of  mil-
lions	of 	objects	to	have	the	ability	
to communicate with each other 
over the Internet, opening up 
countless household and business 
applications.

In	both	fixed-line	and	cellular	
markets, the transition to higher 
capacity networks is accompanied 
by a shift to IP-based networks. 
As a consequence, voice over 
Internet Protocol (VoIP) usage is 

on the rise (for example through 
services like Skype or Vonage) 
but so too is the possibility of  
watching moving images over 
IP networks. New technologies 
such as digital video broadcasting 
and digital multimedia broadcast-
ing will allow viewers to watch 
streamed content on mobile 
devices anytime, anywhere. 

The world of  entertainment ap-
pears to be entering a whole new 
era.  At the same time, digital 
technology	is	having	a	significant	
impact on the nature of  social 
interactions.  Mobile phones have 
already changed the way people 
communicate, arrange meetings 
and multitask. 

The expansion of  electronic and 
digital infrastructure has given 
many millions of  people the poten-
tial to learn, publish and commu-

nicate on an unprecedented scale.  
Children and young people have 
very often been the “pioneers ” of  
adopting and adapting to the new 
possibilities presented by these new 
and emerging technologies. It has 
been tremendously empowering for 
many young people and is open-
ing up huge new possibilities in the 
fields	of 	education	and	personal-
ized learning.

The rapidly declining real cost 
of  the requisite information 
and communication technolo-
gies, combined with vast changes 
and enhancements to the avail-
able infrastructure, have allowed 
many children and young people 
to take advantage of  technology 
to do and achieve things unknown 
to earlier generations.

While the development of  the 
Internet differs by country and 

region, Internet access is available 
almost anywhere.  In develop-
ing countries, many Internet and 
phone connections are using 
wireless technology rather than 
fixed-line	access;	data	storage	and	
transfer are becoming decentra-
lised and seemingly limitless.  The 
“networked society” that has been 
visualised for some decades is 
becoming a reality.  

With increasing access, the Internet 
is becoming truly global, offering 
its	benefits	to	more	and	more	peo-
ple, including children and young 
people.  The culture and economy 
of  a country will shape how the 
Internet develops and this will have 
an impact on the risks that children 
will face as well as how those risks 
are addressed by the different lo-
cal stakeholders. There can be no 
simple or single blueprint to tackle 
such a complex issue. 

9



www.itu.int/cop

Guidelines for Policy Makers



www.itu.int/cop

Guidelines for Policy Makers

The Internet has now been in ex-
istence for several decades, how-
ever, the nature of  it has changed 
dramatically since its inception. In 
the beginning it was mainly a tool 
to exchange information and data 
between governmental agencies 
and academic institutions. In the 
1980s,	the	Internet	was	opened	
to the general public. With the 
advent of  the World Wide Web 
in	the	1990s,	the	Internet	started	
to grow at an astonishing rate. In 
recent years another revolution 
has taken place: the emergence 
of 	Web	2.0.	The	web	is	becom-
ing more interactive and a much 
larger cross section of  society has 
a presence on the Internet. More 
people are connected now, with 
children and young people very 

Children’s and Young 
People’s Use of 
the Internet

11

2. often leading the pack as early users.While the development of  the web opened up the Internet to the general public, for some time it remained a network that was owned and populated mainly by 
governments, academic institu-
tions and commercial corpora-
tions. Individuals largely went 
online to access information that 
was provided to them by these 
large players. This early period of  
the web was marked by several 
characteristics:
•	  Low levels of  connectivity
•	 Mainly low bandwidth
•	 Low capacity for data storage 
•	 One way communication 

and access





Guidelines for Policy Makers

Over time the Internet continued 
to evolve with four developments 
being of  special importance: 
•	 Increase in affordable band-

width
•	 Increase in comparatively 

inexpensive storage capacity
•	 Lower access costs
•	 Development of  the mobile 

Internet

These new developments helped 
to establish a new type of  Inter-
net;	instead	of 	simply	connecting	
individuals	to	firms,	organizations	
and governments, the Internet 
also began to enable individuals 
to connect to each other and for 
them to become online publishers 
in their own right. This new Inter-
net,	often	referred	to	as	Web	2.0,	
has the following characteristics:
•	 High levels of  connectivity
•	 High bandwidth
•	 High levels of  storage capac-

ity
•	 Personalized and interac-

tive contact (user generated 
content)

New tools have been developed 
that provide users with various 
means to socialize and to connect 
with each other. These tools in-
clude: instant messaging, chat and 
message boards, photo and video 
hosting services, and peer-to-peer 
file	exchange	programmes	(P2P).	
Taken together these technolo-
gies, and others, have given rise to 
the phenomenal growth in social 
networking sites which in a very 
short period of  time have become 
enormously popular with children 
and young people.  

Interactivity and User 
Generated Content 
Children and young people, as 
well as adults, increasingly live 
out important parts of  their lives 
with the assistance of  these new 
technologies, and as a result, the 
nature of  the risks they take have 
become inextricably entangled 
with wider aspects of  their behav-
iors.  It is now no longer possible 

to draw neat lines between so 
called “Internet issues”, and “real 
world” problems. 

Social Networking Sites 
The qualitatively new and very 
clever dimension that is the hall-
mark of  social networking sites is 
the way they have brought several 
pre-existing Internet technolo-
gies together into a single place, 
added new features, and created 
very user friendly interfaces. 
These new interfaces mean it has 
become extremely easy to use 
the various features. Taken to-
gether this has triggered the rapid 
growth in the popularity of  social 
networking sites which has caught 
many people by surprise, particu-
larly parents. 

Social networking sites allow 
users	to	create	an	online	profile	
in which they can display a range 
of  personal information, such 
as age, gender, home town and 
interests. In particular the new 
interfaces developed by the social 

13



for example by setting their pro-
file	to	“private”	or	“friends	only”,	
their	full	profiles	would	be	open	
for anyone to view. This made 
them vulnerable to predators who 
might have masked their age in 
order  to build a relationship with 
the child or young person. There 
have been cases reported where 
some children and young people 
have posted sexualized images of  
themselves, or have exchanged 
them via mobile phones, a phe-
nomenon known as “sexting”7, 
often without realizing that 
the image itself  might be both 
harmful to them and illegal, but 
in addition it might be viewable 
by large numbers of  people who 
could	visit	their	site	or	profile.			
More generally social networking 
sites have highlighted the problem 
of  how to manage user gener-
ated content, the characteristic 
feature	of 	Web	2.0.	Some	sites	
have developed proactive modera-

tion policies, where they search 
out inappropriate or illegal videos 
and images, whereas others will 
only look at an individual picture 
or video if  it is drawn to their at-
tention by a report from someone 
who	finds	it	to	be	objectionable	
and wants it removed.  

The popularity of  individual 
social networking sites often 
follows language and regional 
factors. A few examples are: 
MySpace (particularly popular in 
Northern America), Facebook 
(most popular in North America, 
Europe	and	Oceania),	Hi5	(most	
popular in Latin America), Orkut 
(Latin America), SkyBlog (Fran-
cophone countries), Live Journal 
(Russia and CIS), Friendster (Asia 
Pacific),	Cyworld	(Republic	of 	
Korea and PR of  China), Linke-
dIn (Europe, US and India), Last.
fm (Nordic and Baltic Countries 
and Central Europe). 

7 Sexting - the relatively new phenomenon where children and young people are putting themselves at risk 
 by posting sexually provocative images of  themselves online or sending them to friends using mobile  
 technologies.
	 Source:	Draft	Guidelines	for	Parents,	Guardians	and	Educators	on	Child	Online	Protection,	ITU	2009																																																																																																																																													
                           

networking sites make it simple 
to personalize individual user 
web pages, for example by add-
ing some of  the users’ favourite 
music, photographs and videos.  
Children and young people have 
become very creatively engaged 
with	this	process.		User	profiles	
on a social networking site have 
become extensions of  the us-
ers and an important way for the 
users to make a statement about 
themselves to their friends and to 
the wider world. 

Most importantly, social network-
ing sites allow users to add friends 
with whom they can exchange 
messages. The audience that can 
view	an	individual’s	profile	typical-
ly depends on how the person has 
utilized the site’s privacy settings. 
Too often, particularly in the early 
days of  social networking, chil-
dren and young people appeared 
to be unaware that, unless they 
took	specific	steps	to	limit	access,	

www.itu.int/cop14

Child Online Protection Initiative



Guidelines for Policy Makers

According to Danah Boyd8, online 
expressions,	personal	profiles	or	
other types of  postings have four 
fundamental characteristics that 
can lead to additional risks for 
children and young people:

1. Persistence: Networked com-
munications are recorded and this 
extends the period of  life of  any 
communication. 

2. Searchability: Because online 
communications are recorded and 
identity is established through 
text, search and discovery tools 
help	people	find	other	people.		

3. Replicability: Networked 
communications can be cop-
ied from one place to another 
verbatim in such a way that there 
is no possibility to distinguish the 
“original” from the “copy.” 

4. Invisible audiences: For 
practical purposes it is impos-
sible to determine who might run 
across	profiles	or	other	online	

communications. This is further 
complicated by the other three 
characteristics mentioned above, 
since	profiles	may	be	viewed	or	
accessed at a different time and 
place from when and where they 
were originally created. 

Instant Messaging and 
Chat
Instant messaging (IM) tools 
allow people to connect to 
others online directly and to have 
conversations through written 
messages (and increasingly 
through video conferencing).  
People can add the names of  
individuals they know to their 
contact list and can see if  they 
are available (online) to talk with.  
These conversations, or “chats”, 
can be held with one person 
(bilaterally) or with a group of  
people (multilaterally). With most 

15

programmes the content of  the 
conversations can be saved if  
wanted or needed.  Well known 
IM and chat programmes include 
MSN Chat, Yahoo! Messenger, 
Google Talk, and AOL Instant 
Messenger. 

Peer-to-Peer File  
Exchange Programmes
Peer-to-peer	file	exchange	
programmes	(also	called	P2P	
programmes) allow individuals to 
directly	upload	and	download	files	
from and to their own storage 
discs.  Anyone using the same 
programme	can	search	for	files	
and download them from others 
that	have	these	files	available.	
These programmes facilitate 
the sharing of  knowledge and 
information, but have also led to 
copyright infringement and the 
proliferation of  malicious ware 

 

8 Danah Boyd, Fellow at Harvard Law School’s Berkman Center for Internet and Society.
9	 	The	Trojan	horse,	also	known	as	Trojan, in the context of  computing and software, describes a class of  

computer threats (malware) that appears to perform a desirable function but in fact performs undis-
closed malicious functions that allow unauthorized access to the host machine, giving them the ability 
to	save	their	files	on	the	user’s	computer	or	even	watch	the	user’s	screen	and	control	the	computer.	See:																								
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trojan_horse_(computing)	

(malware) such as viruses and 
Trojans9.  These networks are also 
used to distribute CAM.  Well-
known	P2P	programmes	include	
Bittorrent, E-mule, E-donkey and 
Kazaa.





Guidelines for Policy Makers

Child Abuse 
Material
A Definition
In	many	jurisdictions	still	photo-
graphs or videos of  children being 
sexually exploited and abused are 
called either “child pornography” 
or “indecent images of  children”. 
Today many practitioners prefer to 
use the term “child abuse material” 
or CAM because it is felt that this 
term more accurately conveys the 
real nature of  the content. This is 
the term which is normally used in 
this document.  

The Internet has completely 
transformed the scale and nature 
of  the production and distribu-
tion of  CAM. 

The sexual revolution of  the mid-
1960s,	marked	by	an	openness	to	
sexual expression and variation, 
heralded a burgeoning demand 
for pornography, with adult 
bookstores springing up in many 
European and American cities10.  
These shops and indeed a whole 
mail order style business stocked 
and supplied a massive amount 
of  pornography of  all kinds right 
across the severity spectrum.  The 
demand for pornography was met 
with vigour by a number of  key 
players all over the world. Like all 
vacuums	it	was	filled	quickly	by	
entrepreneurs and a large supply 
network arose very quickly.  

10	 	O’Donnell	and	Milner,	(2007),	Child	Pornography,	Crime		 	
 computers and society, Willan.

3.
17



Child Online Protection Initiative

Some of  the pornography being 
bought, sold and traded included 
images of  children being sexually 
abused.  Anti-CAM laws passed 
in	1977	in	the	United	States	soon	
spread to Europe and the pro-
duction of  CAM soon waned 
and was driven underground.  By 
1986,	virtually	all	the	traditional	
avenues for obtaining this kind of  
material	had	been	firmly	closed,	
raising the possibility of  a thor-
ough suppression of  the CAM 
trade.11

Historically,	the	difficulties	of 	
finding	CAM	at	this	point	meant	
that people who wanted to in-
dulge in CAM had to take huge 
risks and a lot of  expense in order 
to get access to material.  All of  
this changed with the advent of  

the Internet.  Dr. Alvin Cooper 
spoke about the “triple A engine” 
for cyber sexuality which can eas-
ily be transferred to the way the 
Internet revolutionised the pos-
session and distribution of  CAM: 
•	 Accessibility (the Internet 

makes	CAM	available	24/7	
all	the	year	round);	

•	 Affordability (most CAM is 
free and available for swap 
or	simple	download);	and	

•	 Anonymity (people genuine-
ly believe that their commu-
nications on the Internet are 
private and hidden). 

This encouraged them to seek out 
and deal in CAM as they felt there 
were no repercussions. The fact 
that it was free and available also 

encouraged the belief  that it was 
harmless.

In	1997,	Sir	William	Utting,	a	
distinguished expert in child 
social services, described CAM 
as a “cottage industry”12.  That 
was probably the last moment in 
history when such a claim could 
be made.  Today it is a global 
industry. It seems that no country 
is immune.

It	is	very	difficult	to	determine	
the precise size or shape of  what 
is essentially a clandestine and 
often illegal enterprise.  All kinds 
of  estimates have been made 
at different points about of  the 
number of  web sites involved13, 
the number of  children being 

abused to create the images14 and 
of  the total monetary value of  
the market in the images.  No one 
who is familiar with the terrain 
doubts that there are a substantial 
number of  people involved in the 
viewing and distribution of  CAM 
and that there has been evidence 
of  the involvement of  organized 
crime15 in the commercial distri-
bution of  this material.  Equally 
there can be no doubt that the 
number of  illegal images now in 
circulation on the Internet runs 
into many millions, while the 
number of  individual children 
depicted in those images runs 
into the tens of  thousands16. And 
these are only the ones that have 
so far been discovered.

11	 Jenkins,	P,	Beyond	Tolerance,	2001,	New	York	University	Press.
12	 UK,	HMSO,	1997
13	 	In	its	Annual	Report	for	2007	the	IWF	maintained	that	fewer	than	3,000	English-language	web	sites	ac-

counted for the bulk of  child abuse images available online. Three years earlier,  the US based Computer 
Crime	Research	Center	said	the	number	was	greater	than	100,000

14  Correspondence with Interpol. And see report by Telefono Arcobaleno. http://www.telefonoarcobaleno.
org/pdf/tredicmoreport_ta.pdf 	

15	 	See	details	of 	the	“Reg	Pay”	case.	http://www.usdoj.gov/criminal/ceos/Press%20Releases/ICE%20Reg-
pay%20PR_080906.pdf

16	 	Correspondence	with	Interpol,	referred	to	above.Telefono	Arcobaleno	in	their	report		speak	of 	36,000	
children	of 	whom	“42%	are	under	7	years	of 	age	and	77%	are	under	the	age	of 	12.”	http://www.telefono-
arcobaleno.org/pdf/tredicmoreport_ta.pdf

www.itu.int/cop18



Guidelines for Policy Makers

Originally one of  the main ways 
of  distributing CAM over the 
Internet was from within Usenet 
Newsgroups. That remains an 
important source but today 
several other Internet technolo-
gies are also being used. Of  these 
perhaps the World Wide Web is 
the most important, because it is 
the most accessible and easiest to 
use. However, as some countries 
have	made	it	very	difficult	to	use	
the web to distribute CAM, other 
Internet technologies are also 
being used more and more fre-
quently.	Of 	these	perhaps	P2P	or	
file	sharing	software	is	the	most	
significant.	According	to	Interpol,	
Peer2Peer	is	technically	quite	easy	
to police but the sheer volume of  
people involved makes it practi-
cally	very	difficult.	

Every time an image of  a child 
being abused appears on the 
Internet or is downloaded, in an 
important sense that child is be-
ing re-abused. Victims must live 
with the longevity and circulation 
of  these images for the rest of  
their lives. The best proof  of  this 
is the reaction of  the victims and 
their families when they learn 
the images have been put into 
circulation or uploaded to the 
Internet17.  

For that reason there is wide-
spread agreement that as soon 
as a child abuse image or web 
site is discovered it is important 
to move as quickly as possible 
to remove the image or have the 
web site taken down or rendered 
inaccessible. In order to facilitate 
this process a system of  national 
hotlines has been developed. Cur-

rently hotlines are operational in 
over	30	different	countries	and	
they are growing in number.18 A 
major	growth	in	hotlines	is	highly	
desirable as part of  a renewed 
global	campaign	to	end	the	traffic	
in CAM online. 

Another reason for moving quick-
ly to remove or render inacces-
sible any illegal images found on 
the Internet is because the longer 
they stay up the greater the pos-
sibility	that	a	new	person	will	find	
the image and perhaps download 
it. There is some evidence to sug-
gest that people who get involved 
in downloading and collecting 
CAM are more likely to engage 
in contact offending or abusing 
children in the real world. (From 
Fantasy to Reality: The Link Between 
Viewing Child Pornography and Mo-
lesting Children. Kim, C (2004).

In the law enforcement sphere the 
importance	of 	victim	identifica-
tion from the CAM posted on 
the Internet has gained ground.  

Processes and systems are being 
put in place nationally which 
means that CAM seized during 
investigations or otherwise com-
ing into the hands of  investigators 
is being examined with a view 
to identifying the victim of  the 
abuse and therefore the perpetra-
tor.  Materials which have not 
been seen before and cannot be 
marked as locally generated are 
floated	into	an	international	net-
work of  investigators and national 
CAM specialists.  This network 
has evolved around the INTER-
POL International Child Sexual 
Exploitation Database (ICSE)
and is coordinated at the Traf-
ficking	in	Human	Beings	section	
of  INTERPOL along with the 
INTERPOL Specialist Group on 
Crimes against Children. 

The aim of  this Database is to 
capture in one place all of  the 
CAM that exists on the Internet 
and that comes into the hands of  
law enforcement.  This material 
is examined by the network of  

17	 	Child	Molesters:	a	behavioral	Analysis,	Kenneth	V.	Lanning,	2001.
18  See www.inhope.org

19





Guidelines for Policy Makers

specialised	officers	worldwide	and,	
where possible, is referred to the 
country of  origin for an investiga-
tion into the identity of  the child 
being victimized.  Where this is not 
possible	the	material	is	filed	in	the	
Database with details as to where it 
was found, by whom and when.  

Powerful retrieval tools indicate 
whether these images were seen 
before or not and, as is often the 
case, images found in one coun-
try can often hold clues which 
can help identify an abuse case in 
another country.  Sometimes, the 
face of  the abuser can be seen in 
the images, leading to apprehen-
sion.

INTERPOL and the COP Initia-
tive encourage best practice in this 
area by encouraging the formation 
of  a centralised, national resource 
which can manage all the material 
being seized inside its borders, 
creating a national hash set and 
contributing to the international 
efforts being made in this area.  

All this reduces effort for inves-
tigators, avoids duplication of  
efforts worldwide, and ultimately 
leads	to	the	identification	of 	
victims and the apprehension of  
offenders.

Harmonisation of 
Laws
The adoption by all countries of  
appropriate legislation against the 
misuse of  information and com-
munication technologies (ICTs) 
for criminal or other purposes is 
central to achieving global cyber-
security. Since threats can originate 
anywhere around the globe, the 
challenges are inherently interna-
tional in scope and require inter-
national cooperation, investigative 
assistance, and common substan-
tive and procedural provisions. 
Thus, it is important that countries 
harmonize their legal frameworks 
to combat cybercrime, protect 
children online and facilitate inter-
national cooperation.

The development of  adequate 
national legislation, the related 
cybercrime legal framework, and 
within this approach, harmoniza-
tion at the international level is a 
key step towards the success of  
any national strategy for child on-
line	protection.	This	requires	first	
and foremost the necessary sub-
stantive criminal law provisions to 
criminalize acts such as computer 
fraud, illegal access, data interfer-
ence, copyright violations and 
CAM. The fact that provisions 
exist in the criminal code that are 
applicable to similar acts com-
mitted in the real world does not 
mean that they can be applied to 
acts committed over the Internet 
as well.  Therefore, a thorough 
analysis of  current national laws is 
vital to identify any possible gaps.  
The next step would be to identify 
and	define	legislative	language	and	
reference material that can assist 
countries in the establishment of  
harmonized cybercrime laws and 
procedural rules. Such practi-
cal instruments can be used by 

21

countries for the elaboration of  a 
cybersecurity legal framework and 
related laws. The ITU has been 
working with Member States and 
relevant stakeholders in this direc-
tion and is heavily contributing to 
the advance the global harmoniza-
tion of  cybercrime laws. 

The International Centre for 
Missing & Exploited Children 
(ICMEC) released its report 
on “Child Pornography: Model 
Legislation & Global Review” in 
April	2006.		The	primary	purpose	
of  the report, which is now in 
its	5th	Edition,	was	to	gain	an	
understanding of  existing CAM 
legislation and to ascertain the im-
portance of  the issue with regard 
to national political agendas.  The 
study focused on a number of  key 
areas:	legislation	specific	to	CAM;	
laws	that	provide	a	definition	of 	
CAM;	laws	that	criminalize	pos-
session, regardless of  intent to 
distribute;	laws	that	address	com-
puter facilitated crimes related to 
CAM;	and	reporting	by	ISPs.		





A	copy	of 	ICMEC’s	detailed	find-
ings is provided in Appendix4. 
It is evident from the report that 
there are considerable and very 
important variations in the legisla-
tive approaches taken by different 
countries. The international com-
munity	must	find	a	way	to	bring	
greater coherence to the attack on 
this global problem.

Another goal of  the ICMEC 
report on model legislation is to 
recommend areas where legisla-
tion is needed to address the vari-
ous aspects of  CAM and related 
crimes on a worldwide basis. As 
with other types of  cybercrime, 
the possession, manufacture and 
distribution of  CAM is often 
conducted without regard to 
international borders and there-
fore requires laws in each country 
that are comparable or legally 
equivalent — this is referred to as 
harmonization.  

Criminals who sexually exploit 
children, whether it is through the 
use of  computers and the Inter-
net or by travel to other countries, 
will prefer to victimize children 
in countries lacking legislation 
or strict enforcement and in 
countries that exist outside the 
framework of  international coop-
eration.  Complying with interna-
tional legal standards and adopt-
ing corresponding national laws 
and practices is a requirement in 
order to address child exploitation 
on an international level.

Many countries broadly address 
child exploitation as it relates to 
labour or other offences or they 
may ban pornography in gen-
eral;	however,	these	laws	are	not	
enough	as	they	do	not	specifi-
cally address the criminal aspects 
of  various forms of  child sexual 
exploitation and child abuse im-
ages. In order to be truly effective, 

countries should be encouraged 
to	adopt	specific	legislation	to	
criminalize CAM and include 
offences	specific	to	the	use	of 	
technology and the Internet as 
it	relates	to	CAM;	otherwise	
criminals will take advantage of  
loopholes in the law. 

There should also be provisions 
in the law for a greater commit-
ment of  resources in order to 
enforce	these	specific	laws	and	for	
training	for	judicial,	prosecutorial	
and	law	enforcement	officials	who	
will invariably be challenged to 
keep up with the use of  technol-
ogy by offenders.

Fundamental areas of  concern 
and guidance for the adoption of  
legislation include:
•	 Defining	a	“child”	in	a	

precise and clear manner 
in accordance with the UN 
Convention of  the Rights of  
the	Child;

•	 Defining	“child	abuse	mate-
rial” (CAM) to include spe-
cific	computer	and	Internet	
terminology;

•	 Creating criminal offences 
specific	to:	possession,	
manufacture and distribution 
of  CAM, including pseudo 
images, deliberately down-
loading or viewing such 
images	on	the	Internet;

•	 Creating criminal penalties 
for parents or guardians who 
agree to or who facilitate 
their child’s participation in 
CAM;

•	 Creating penalties for those 
who make known to others 
where	to	find	CAM;

•	 Making attempts at crimes 
related to CAM a criminal 
offence;

•	 Addressing criminal liabil-
ity of  children involved in 
CAM.  Criminal liability 
must focus on the adult of-
fender,	not	the	child	victim;

23



Guidelines for Policy Makers

•	 Enhancing penalties for 
repeat offenders, organized 
crime members and other 
aggravated factors to be con-
sidered upon sentencing.

A	basic	definition	of 	CAM	should	
include the visual representation 
or depiction of  a child engaged in 
a real or simulated sexual display 
or act, or pseudo images of  the 
same;	it	should	also	take	into	
account how technology such 
as computers, the Internet, cell 
phones, PDAs, game consoles, 
video cameras, and DVDs, are 
used to facilitate CAM, making 
it clear that CAM and everything 
connected with it is illegal, irre-
spective of  the platform.  

Forensic Computer  
Training for Law  
Enforcement
Apart from substantive criminal 
law provisions, law enforcement 
agencies need the necessary tools 
and instruments to investigate 
cybercrime.  Such investigations 
themselves present a number 
of  challenges. Perpetrators can 
act from nearly any location in 
the world and take measures to 
mask their identity.  The tools and 
instruments needed to investigate 
cybercrime can be quite different 
from those used to investigate 
ordinary crimes.

The Internet, computers, cell 
phones, PDAs and digital de-
vices of  all types have become 
indispensible tools for predators 
seeking to sexually exploit chil-
dren.  The technology on which 
these devices operate is increas-

ingly complex and changes at a 
rapid rate.  In order to capture 
and preserve important evidence 
left by offenders it is essential 
for law enforcement authorities 
to have the training and techni-
cal expertise to retrieve evidence 
consistent with domestic and 
international court requirements.  
Therefore, training must be made 
available to law enforcement, 
judicial	and	prosecutorial	officials	
to help them understand how 
to conduct forensic analysis of  
computer hard drives and other 
devices.  This training must be 
constantly updated to keep up 
with ever-changing technology 
and give them hands-on experi-
ence.  There are many software 
suites which provide the tools to 
carry out read only examinations 
of  seized media and training is 
often included in the purchase 
price of  the suite.  Unfortunately 
these solutions are often quite 

expensive and beyond the reach 
of  developing countries.  Training 
from within the law enforcement 
and private security industry may 
be available with proper funding.

Many companies in the private 
sector have the technology and 
the expertise to assist with this 
type of  work so partnerships 
between the public and private 
sectors for training and technical 
support may be able to provide 
critical assistance.

International Cooperation 
and Data Sharing
It is very important to develop a 
high level of  international coop-
eration and data sharing.  

A fundamental role of  ITU, fol-
lowing	WSIS	is	to	build	confi-
dence and security in the use of  
ICTs. Heads of  states and govern-
ment and other global leaders par-

www.itu.int/cop24



Guidelines for Policy Makers

ticipating in WSIS as well as ITU 
Member States entrusted ITU to 
take concrete steps towards curb-
ing the threats and insecurities 
related to the information society.

WSIS considered that Action Line 
C5	encompasses	a	broad	range	
of  themes and stakeholders.  As 
emphasized	in	paragraph	110	of 	
the Tunis Agenda, the “coordination 
of  multi-stakeholder implementation 
activities would help to avoid duplica-
tion of  activities.  This should include, 
inter alia, information exchange, 
creation of  knowledge, sharing of  best 
practices, and assistance in developing 
multi-stakeholder and public/private 
partnership”.

INTERPOL19, through its net-
work	of 	187	countries,	special-
izes in facilitating the exchange 
of  police-to-police information.  
This network allows the instant 
exchange of  information between 

countries and by extension of  the 
i24/7	system,	directly	to	specialist	
units.

Where the exchange of  informa-
tion	and	evidence	is	in	the	judicial	
sphere, mutual cooperation on 
international criminal investiga-
tions is accomplished under the 
legal framework and provisions 
of  bilateral mutual legal assistance 
treaties or multilateral conven-
tions.  These are not always suited 
to the fast moving world of  the 
Internet.

In spite of  treaty agreements, if  
there is not a corresponding law 
in the country where coopera-
tion is requested, assistance may 
not be provided at all or it may 
be provided on a very restricted 
basis. The party providing the 
information may place conditions 
upon the use of  the information 
and	may	require	confidentiality.

A collaborative approach aimed at 
building consensus at the global 
level on those common elements 
that should be part of  any legal 
framework for protecting the 
children in cyberspace is funda-
mental.  Given the international 
nature of  cybercrime and of  child 
exploitation in particular, effec-
tive international law enforcement 
cooperation is imperative if  we 
are to address the problem on a 
global scale.

19  INTERPOL also coordinates the INTERPOL working party on crimes against children which meets once 
a	year	in	a	group	session.		There	are	five	sub	groups	within	the	working	party	and	members	of 	this	group	
meet	virtually	throughout	the	year	in	an	effort	to	work	on	projects.		The	five	sub-groups	are:	Internet	

facilitated	crimes	against	children,	Sex	Offenders,	Child	Trafficking	and	Serious	and	violent	crimes	against	
children.		The	fifth	sub-group	is	a	victim	identification	subgroup	which	facilitates	the	international	coopera-
tion which is a daily fact around the International Child Sexual Exploitation database.

25





Guidelines for Policy Makers

27

Reporting  
Requirements 
Members of  the public who come 
into contact with CAM should 
report it to local law enforcement 
and/or to a national hotline.20  
Additionally, there are three 
classes of  individuals and organi-
zations that should be particularly 
encouraged to report suspected 
CAM, either directly to a law 
enforcement agency or another 
designated organization, such as a 
hotline:

1. Individuals who in their 
professional capacity come 
into contact with children 
and owe a duty of  care to 
the children, e.g. teach-
ers, coaches, counsellors, 
healthcare providers and law 
enforcement	officers.

2. Individuals who in their 
professional capacity do 
not necessarily come into 
contact with children but 
may be exposed to CAM in 
the course of  their work, e.g. 
computer technicians, photo 
developers.

3. Organizations or corpora-
tions whose services are 
being used to proliferate 
CAM and who should 
exercise corporate citizen-
ship responsibility, e.g. ISPs 
and other ESPs, credit card 
companies and banks.

While the inclusion of  people 
in	categories	1.	and	2.	are	self-
explanatory, reporting by ISPs, 
banks and credit card companies 
is critical in that their services are 
essential in the transmission of  
such material and their services 
are being “misused” by criminals 

to victimize children.  These in-
dustries are in a position to detect 
evidence of  CAM and should be 
strongly encouraged to cooperate 
with authorities to provide infor-
mation regarding CAM when they 
come upon it.  

It should be noted that some 
companies are currently provid-
ing valuable assistance of  this 
nature.  In the case of  ISPs and 
ESPs, it is more likely that they 
themselves will come across 
evidence	of 	CAM	in	files,	URLs,	
domain names and actual images 
that should be reported to the ap-
propriate authorities immediately.  
Moreover, the sharing of  URLs, 
domain names and IP addresses 
provides an opportunity for 
disrupting access to known child 
abuse web sites.  ISPs and ESPs 
should also be encouraged to pro-
actively scan their networks for 
CAM and report it to the relevant 
law enforcement authorities.

Given the current role of  the 
Internet and its use for criminal 
purposes, cooperation with Inter-
net-related companies is essential.  
Furthermore, legislation should 
provide protection for ISPs, ESPs 
and other private entities that 
report CAM and should include 
guidance for the safe handling and 
transmission of  images.  

A “Notice and Takedown” regime 
should be established to allow 
ISPs, ESPs, domain registrars and 
web hosts to close an offending 
site or cancel an email account 
upon request.  In most cases, such 
criminal use will be in violation of  
the “Terms of  Use” contract that 
the user agrees to with the ISP or 
ESPs, thus giving the company 
uncontested rights to take ap-
propriate action. When possible, 
these actions should be closely 
coordinated with law enforcement 
in an effort to ensure that an 
investigation is launched that may 

20	 	National	hotlines	will	refer	reports	to	law	enforcement;	law	enforcement	can	then	analyse	the	reports	for	
local connections or send the information on to the International Child Sexual Exploitation Database for 
analysis.



Guidelines for Policy Makers

28

save a child from abuse and that 
will allow for the capture of  the 
criminals involved.  

Unfortunately the sale of  CAM 
on the Internet has become a lu-
crative global enterprise that relies 
on bank services, wire transfers 
and credit cards to facilitate the 
sale, distribution or transmission 
of 	CAM.		Financial	industry	offi-
cials who come upon information 
related to CAM should report 
it to the appropriate authorities.  
Often web sites offering “pay per 
view” or subscriptions to CAM 
accept credit cards or money 
transfer services for payment.  

As	a	general	rule	the	financial	
services industry should be en-
couraged to cooperate in line with 
the model of  the Financial Coali-
tion Against Child Pornography 
(FCACP)21,	a	joint	project	of 	IC-
MEC and its sister organisation, 
the National Center for Missing 
& Exploited Children (NCMEC).  
This effective coalition provides 

a vehicle for close cooperation 
among	the	financial	services	
industry, the Internet services 
industry, law enforcement and 
NGOs. It has achieved notewor-
thy success in denying commercial 
suppliers of  CAM the use of  the 
international	financial	system.		
Working together, the members 
of  the FCACP have been able to 
not only report transactions and 
suspicious accounts, but also to 
track account activity and money 
flows	in	order	to	identify	per-
sons and organizations ultimately 
responsible for selling CAM. A 
European version of  this coalition 
was	launched	in	2009.

Reducing the Availability 
of Child Abuse Images
The proliferation of  CAM on the 
Internet has created a public out-
cry for action.  Law enforcement, 
ISPs, ESPs and NGOs across the 
globe are collaborating to combat 
this content online.  It is clear that 
law enforcement cannot arrest 

their way out of  this problem and 
that more needs to be done to 
disrupt	and	reduce	the	traffic	in	
CAM.  As a result, many countries 
have begun to explore additional 
remedies that augment traditional 
law enforcement approaches.

An approach which has been 
adopted in several countries is to 
encourage ISPs and other ESPs 
to reduce the availability of  web 
pages that are known to offer 
CAM and to block access to 
Usenet Newsgroups that either 
regularly contain such content or 
advertise its availability.

In this approach, a “list” of  
Usenet Newsgroups and active 
web pages containing or advertis-
ing CAM is provided to ISPs and 
ESPs.  This list is constructed and 
provided either by law enforce-
ment or, in some cases, directly 
by national hotlines. It is very 
important that the basis on which 
such lists are constructed is clearly 
articulated. There should be no 

room for any suspicion that gov-
ernmental, law enforcement or 
other	bodies	are	able	to	influence	
its composition so as to include 
Newsgroups or web sites which 
do not contain CAM but instead 
contain items which they do not 
want to be published for other 
reasons.  

When producing and distributing 
the list to ISPs and ESPs, an on-
going dialogue with law enforce-
ment is crucial.  Law enforcement 
needs adequate time to access, 
review and document the content 
and, if  appropriate, to initiate an 
investigation.  Failure to account 
for law enforcement activity could 
obstruct or delay an on-going 
investigation.  Further, without 
law enforcement participation 
and investigation, the individuals 
who continuously distribute CAM 
online will never be apprehended 
and	brought	to	justice.

It is important that the list of  
known sites and Usenet News-

www.itu.int/cop

21	 	FCACP	:	http://www.icmec.org/missingkids/servlet/PageServlet?LanguageCountry=en_X1&PageId=3064.



Guidelines for Policy Makers

29

groups is tested frequently, updat-
ed	and	verified	to	ensure	accuracy.	
The	list	should	not	be	cumulative;	
rather, a multi-layered retesting 
procedure will help to ensure 
public	confidence	in	the	operation	
of  the list. It is also important to 
ensure that guidelines on list crite-
ria be transparent. Some countries 
utilize an independent means of  
auditing the performance and 
operation of  the list. Lastly, a 
mechanism should exist to allow 
for an appeal against inclusion on 
the list. The only sites on the list 
should be those which allow the 
publishing or display of  content 
which is illegal according to the 
national laws of  the country con-
cerned.  When a site is blocked, a 
STOP page should be displayed 
to the user. This STOP page has 
the dual function of  giving infor-
mation as to the reason the site 
was blocked (illegality of  content) 
plus acting as a prevention vehicle 
that reminds the user/consumer 
of  the illegal nature of  the mate-
rial, as well as the presence of  law 

enforcement agencies online.

Blocking access to web sites and 
Usenet Newsgroups containing 
CAM can make an important 
contribution to disrupting and 
reducing the volume of  content 
being circulated or distributed 
over the Internet.  However, this 
is recognized as only a part of  the 
solution.  This approach is not 
meant to be the only solution. 
The goal is to complement the 
efforts of  law enforcement and 
to reduce the availability of  CAM 
online. Individuals who have a 
sexual interest in children and 
enough technical knowledge and 
determination, may still be able 
to locate it.  However, the web in 
particular, has such an easy user 
interface and has become one of  
the most widely used and most 
popular Internet applications, that 
it	is	essential	to	develop	specific	
approaches for tackling it while 
continuing to evaluate new meth-
ods to thwart distribution on the 
other platforms of  the Internet.

Thought should always be given 
to	a	joint	government/industry	
awareness media campaign aimed 
at the consumers of  CAM.  Us-
ers/consumers should be remind-
ed that CAM represents real pain 
for real children, and creating, 
possessing or distributing CAM is 
illegal in many countries.  



“Children and young people
are often particularly 

vulnerable online”



Guidelines for Policy Makers

Key Risks to  
Children Online
While adults and children alike 
are exposed to a range of  risks 
and dangers online, children and 
young people are often particu-
larly vulnerable. Children are still 
in a process of  developing and 
learning. This has consequences 
for their capacity to identify, as-
sess and manage potential risks.   
The idea that children are vul-
nerable and should be protected 
from all forms of  exploitation is 
outlined in the UN Convention 
on the Rights of  the Child22.   

There are a number of  issues in 
relation to children’s and young 
people’s use of  the Internet 
which are of  on going concern to 
parents and children alike, as well 
as to governments, politicians and 

the policy making community. 
These concerns can be summa-
rized as follows:

Content
•	 The Internet’s ability to 

expose children and young 
people to illegal content, e.g. 
CAM. 

•	 The Internet’s ability to 
expose children and young 
people to legal but age inap-
propriate material e.g. very 
violent imagery.

22	 	http://www.unhchr.ch/html/menu3/b/k2crc.htm

31

4.



Guidelines for Policy Makers



Contact
•	 The Internet’s ability to 

expose children and young 
people to sexual predators, 
be they adults or other legal 
minors23.  

•	 The way in which the Inter-
net may expose children to 
harmful online communities 
such as sites which encour-
age anorexia, self  harm or 
suicide – as well as sources 
of 	political	influence	espous-
ing violence, hate and politi-
cal extremism.    

Conduct
•	 The way in which the 

Internet facilitates and 
can promote risky sexual 
interactions between chil-
dren themselves, including 
encouraging them to take 
and post pictures of  them-
selves or others (sexting) 
which, aside from being 
harmful, may also be illegal. 
Normal sexual development 
and experimentation online 

can sometimes result in 
the inadvertent production 
and distribution of  CAM 
exposing the child and his or 
her friends to possible legal 
sanction or involvement 
with the blunt edge of  the 
criminal	justice	system.

•	 The way in which some 
aspects of  the Internet en-
courage children to place in 
the public domain informa-
tion about themselves, or 
post pictures or videos or 
text which might compro-
mise their personal safety 
or	jeopardize	a	number	of 	
career options for them in 
the future.  

•	 The Internet’s ability to 
expose children and young 
people to bullying and to al-
low or promote an environ-
ment in which children and 
young people are encour-
aged to bully others.

Commerce
•	 The ways in which the 

Internet has enabled chil-
dren to access or acquire 
age inappropriate goods and 
services, typically goods and 
services which they could 
not purchase in person from 
a shop.

•	 The Internet’s ability to 
expose children and young 
people to scams, iden-
tity theft, fraud and similar 
threats which are economic 
in nature or are rooted in 
inadequate data protection 
or privacy laws.

Excessive use
•	 The way the Internet seems, 

with some children and 
young people, to have en-
couraged forms of  obsessive 
behavior or excessive use 
which may have deleterious 
effects on children’s and 
young people’s health or 
social skills, or both. Games 
and gaming over the Inter-

net often feature in this type 
of  online behavior which in 
some countries is referred to 
as a form of  addiction.  

Societal
•	 The way the Internet has 

opened up a new digital 
divide among children and 
young people, both in terms 
of  those who have ready and 
convenient access to it at 
home, school and elsewhere, 
and	those	who	do	not;	be-
tween	those	who	are	confi-
dent	and	proficient	users	of 	it	
and those who are not. This 
divide threatens to entrench 
or widen existing patterns of  
advantage and disadvantage 
or perhaps create new divides.

•	 The potential of  the Inter-
net to compound and even 
magnify the existing vulner-
abilities of  particular children 
and young people and add to 
adversities that they may face 
in	the	offline	world.		

33

Child Online Protection Initiative
23	 	See	Appendix	1	for	further	detailed	discussion	of 	this	aspect.





Guidelines for Policy Makers

Addressing 
the Risks
A National Checklist5.

35



Guidelines for Policy Makers

# A National Checklist

Comprehensive 
Legal 
Framework

1. It will generally be necessary for there to be in place a body of  laws which 
makes it clear that any and every crime that can be committed against a child in 
the real world can, mutatis mutandis, also be committed on the Internet or on any 
other electronic network.

It may also be necessary to develop new laws or adapt existing ones to outlaw 
certain types of  behavior which can only take place on the Internet, for 
example the remote enticement of  children to perform or watch sexual acts, or 
“grooming” children to meet in the real world for a sexual purpose.

Ancillary to these purposes it will generally be necessary for there to be in 
place a legal framework which outlaws the misuse of  computers for criminal 
ends, outlaws hacking or other malicious or non-consensual use of  computer 
code and establishes that the Internet is a locus within which crimes can be 
committed.

36 www.itu.int/cop



Guidelines for Policy Makers

# A National Checklist

Need For a 
National Focus 
on Online Child 
Protection

2. Several national governments have found it useful to bring together all of  
the key stakeholders and players to focus on developing and implementing a 
national initiative around making the Internet a safer place for children and 
young people, and raising awareness of  the issues and how to deal with them in 
a very practical way. 

It will be important within this strategy to realise that the Internet can now 
be accessed via several different kinds of  devices.  Computers are only one of  
many ways of  going online.  Mobile phones, games consoles and PDAs are also 
increasingly	important.		The	providers	of 	both	wireless	and	fixed-line	access	
need to be involved.  Additionally in many countries the network of  public 
libraries, telecentres and Internet cafes can be important sources of  Internet 
access particularly for children and young people.

Some countries have found it to be advantageous to establish a self  or co-
regulatory model in relation to developing policy in this area and through such 
models they have, for example, published codes of  good practice to guide 
the Internet industry in terms of  the measures which may work best when it 
comes to keeping children and young people safer online. This has also worked 
at the regional level, for example within the European Union where EU-wide 
codes have been published both for social networking sites and mobile phone 
networks in relation to the provision of  content and services to children 
and young people via their networks. Self  and co-regulation can be a very 
effective way of  helping to engage and sustain the involvement of  all relevant 
stakeholders and can also be very effective in terms of  enhancing the speed with 
which appropriate responses to technological change can be formulated and put 
into effect. 

Schools and the education system generally will play a very important part in 
rolling out such a national strategy, but the strategy also needs to go wider than 
that.

37



Guidelines for Policy Makers

# A National Checklist

Need For a 
National Focus 
on Online Child 
Protection

Consideration should also be given to enlisting the aid of  the mass media in 
promoting awareness messages and campaigns.

Need to Develop 
Local Resources 
Which Reflect 
National Laws 
and Local 
Cultural Norms

3. Many of  the large Internet companies produce web sites which contain a 
great deal of  information about online issues for children and young people.  
However, very often this material will only be available in English or in a very 
narrow band of  languages.  It is very important, therefore, that materials are 
produced	locally	which	reflect	local	laws	as	well	as	local	cultural	norms.	This	will	
be essential for any Internet safety campaign or any training materials that are 
developed.

Need for Public 
Education and 
Awareness 
Activities

4. Parents and guardians and professional, such as teachers, have a crucial role to 
play in helping to keep children and young people safer online. Educational and 
outreach programmes should be developed which help build awareness of  the 
issues and also provide strategies for dealing with them.

When producing educational materials it is important to bear in mind that many 
people who are new to the technology will not feel comfortable using it. For 
that reason it is important to ensure that safety materials are made available in 
either written form or produced using other media with which newcomers will 
feel more familiar, for example, with video. 

Within any education and awareness campaign it will be important to strike the 
right tone. Fear-based messaging should be avoided and due prominence should 
be given to the new technology’s many positive and fun features. The Internet 
has great potential as a means of  empowering children and young people 
to discover new worlds.. Teaching positive and responsible forms of  online 
behaviour	is	a	key	objective	of 	education	and	awareness	programs.

38 www.itu.int/cop



Guidelines for Policy Makers

39
# A National Checklist

Need for 
Reporting 
Mechanisms for 
Online Predatory 
Behavior, 
Including 
Bullying 

5. Mechanisms for reporting abuse of  an online service or for reporting 
objectionable	or	illegal	behavior	online,	for	example	to	a	national	hotline,	should	
be widely advertised and promoted both on the Internet and in other media. 
Links to report abuse mechanisms should be prominently displayed on relevant 
parts of  any web site that allows user generated content to appear. It should also 
be possible for people who feel threatened in any way, or for people who have 
witnessed any worrying activity on the Internet, to be able to report it as quickly 
as possible to the relevant law enforcement agencies who need to be trained 
and ready to respond. The Virtual Global Taskforce is a law enforcement body 
which	provides	a	24/7	mechanism	to	receive	reports	about	illegal	behaviour	
or content from persons in the USA, Canada, Australia and Italy, with other 
countries	expected	to	join	soon.	See	www.virtualglobaltaskforce.com	

Helping 
Children to Stay 
Safer Through 
the Use of  
Technical Tools

6 There are a number of  software programmes available which can help screen 
out unwanted material or block unwanted contacts.  Some of  these child 
safety	and	filtering	programmes	may	be	essentially	free	because	they	are	part	
of  a computer’s operating system or they are provided as part of  a package 
available from an ISP or ESP. The manufacturers of  some game consoles also 
provide similar tools if  the device is Internet enabled. These programmes are 
not foolproof  but they can provide a welcome level of  support, particularly in 
families with younger children.

These technical tools should be used as part of  a broader arsenal. Parental and/
or guardian involvement is critical. As children start getting a bit older they will 
want more privacy and they will also feel a strong desire to start exploring on 
their own. In addition, where a billing relationship exists between vendor and 
customer,	age	verification	processes	can	play	a	very	valuable	role	in	helping	
vendors of  age restricted goods and services or the publishers of  material 
which is intended only for audiences at or above a certain age, to reach out to 
those	specific	audiences.	Where	no	billing	relationship	exists	the	use	of 	age	
verification	technology	may	be	problematic	or	in	many	countries	it	may	be	
impossible due to a lack of  reliable data sources..

39



40 www.itu.int/cop

Guidelines for Policy Makers



www.itu.int/cop

Guidelines for Policy Makers

41

Stakeholders
In developing a national strategy to 
promote online safety for children 
and young people national govern-
ments and the policy making insti-
tutions need to identify and engage 
with the key stakeholders.

Children and Young 
People 
Across the world children and 
young people have shown that 
they can adapt to and use the new 
technologies with great ease. The 
Internet is becoming increasingly 
important within schools and as 
an arena where children and young 
people work, play and communi-
cate.

Most children and young people 
have no fear of  the Internet and 
are comfortable using the differ-
ent devices that can now provide 
access to it. Children’s and young 
people’s knowledge of  how com-

puters and the Internet work will 
often exceed that of  their parents 
or teachers. 

But knowledge is not the same 
as wisdom. Children’s and young 
people’s lack of  experience of  the 
wider world can render them vul-
nerable to a range of  risks. They 
have a right to expect help and 
protection. It is also important to 
remember that not all children and 
young people will experience the 
Internet or the new technologies in 
the same way. Some children with 
special needs caused by physi-
cal or other disabilities may be 
particularly vulnerable in an online 
environment and so will need extra 
support.

Surveys have repeatedly shown 
that what adults think children 
and young people are doing 
online and what is actually hap-

6.
41



Guidelines for Policy Makers

pening can be very different. For 
this reason, if  for no other, it is 
important to ensure, in whatever 
arrangements are made at the 
national level to develop policy 
in this area, that appropriate 
mechanisms are found to enable 
all children’s and young people’s 
voices to be heard and that their 
concrete experiences of  using the 
technology are taken into account. 

Parents, Guardians and 
Educators 
One of  the reasons many parents 
are buying computers with Internet 
access for use at home is to help 
with their children’s education and 
to help with homework assign-
ments. Schools therefore have a 
particular responsibility to teach 
children about how to stay safer 
online, whether they are using the 
Internet in school, at home or 
anywhere else. In order for teachers 

to be able to do that they, in turn, 
need professional training linked 
to	first	class,	up	to	date	teaching	
resources.

Parents and guardians will almost 
always	be	the	first,	last	and	best	line	
of  defense and support for their 
own children. Yet when it comes 
to the Internet they might feel a 
little lost. Again schools can act as 
an important channel for reach-
ing out to parents and guardians, 
to make them aware both of  the 
risks and the many positive possi-
bilities which the new technologies 
present. However, schools should 
not be the only route used to reach 
out to parents and guardians. It is 
important to use many different 
channels so as to maximize the pos-
sibility of  reaching out to as large a 
number of  parents and guardians as 
possible. Public libraries, health cen-
tres, even shopping malls and other 
major	retail	centres	can	all	provide	

accessible venues for thepresenta-
tion of  safety information.

Industry 
Clearly companies that are devel-
oping or providing new technology 
products and services are going 
to be well placed to help other 
stakeholders understand how they 
work and how to use them safely 
and appropriately. For that reason 
it is important to engage with busi-
nesses to encourage them to share 
their knowledge and expertise.  

The	industry	also	has	a	major	
responsibility to help promote 
awareness of  the online and safety 
agenda, particularly to children and 
young people and their parents or 
guardians, but also to the wider 
community. By engaging in this 
way the industry will learn more 
about different stakeholders’ con-
cerns and that knowledge will help 
them to identify such hazards in 
any new products or services they 

have in development, as well as en-
able them to correct existing ones.

In some countries the Internet is 
governed by a framework of  self  
regulation or co-regulation. This 
can give the Internet industry a 
voice in the development of  public 
policy and can help ensure that 
policy is well founded technically. 
It also can mean that, as technolo-
gy	changes,	adjustments	in	practice	
can be introduced quite rapidly 
without having to wait for the 
sometimes lengthy processes in-
volved in devising and passing new 
laws.  While welcoming industry’s 
engagement in helping to promote 
a better understanding of  online 
safety issues it will also be impor-
tant for national governments and 
other parts of  the policy making 
community to have their own inde-
pendent sources of  advice.

42 www.itu.int/cop



Guidelines for Policy Makers

The Research  
Community and NGOs 
Within the universities and other 
parts of  the research community 
there is very likely to be a range 
of  academics and scholars who 
have a professional interest in 
and a very detailed knowledge of  
both the social and the technical 
aspects and impact of  the Inter-
net. They could be a very valu-
able resource in terms of  helping 
national governments and policy 
makers to develop strategies 
which are based on hard facts and 
good evidence. They can also act 
as an intellectual counterweight to 
the high-tech companies whose 
interests can sometimes be short 
term in nature and be predomi-
nantly commercial in character.

Similarly, within the NGO com-
munity there will very often be 
a range of  expertise and infor-
mation which can be an invalu-
able resource in reaching out or 
providing services to children, 

young people, parents, guardians 
and educators to help promote 
the online safety agenda.

Law Enforcement 
It is a sad fact that as wonderful as 
technology is, it has also attracted 
the attention of  criminal and anti-
social elements. The Internet has 
greatly increased the circulation 
of  CAM.  Sexual predators have 
used the Internet to make initial 
contact with children and young 
people, luring them into very 
harmful forms of  contact, online 
and	offline.	Bullying	and	other	
forms of  harassment can do great 
harm to children’s and young 
people’s lives and the Internet has 
provided a new way for that to 
happen. 

For these reasons, it is essential 
that the law enforcement com-
munity becomes fully engaged 
with any overall strategy to help 
make the Internet safer for 
children and young people. Law 
enforcement	officers	need	to	be	

appropriately trained to conduct 
investigations into Internet related 
crimes against children and young 
people. They need the right level 
of  technical knowledge and ac-
cess to forensic facilities to enable 
them to extract and interpret data 
obtained from computers or the 
Internet.

In addition, it is very important 
that law enforcement estab-
lishes clear mechanisms to enable 
children and young people, or 
any member of  the public, to 
report any incidents or concerns 
they might have about a child’s 
or a young person’s online safety. 
Many countries, for example, have 
established hotlines to facilitate 
reports of  CAM and similar 
dedicated mechanisms exist to 
facilitate reports of  other kinds 
of  issues, for example bullying 
and other kinds of  threatening 
behavior.

Law enforcement is the primary 
source for CAM seized within 
national borders.  A process 
should be put in place to examine 
this material in order to establish 
whether local victims can be iden-
tified.		Where	this	is	not	possible	
the material should be passed 
onto INTERPOL for inclusion in 
the ICSE Database.

Social Services
Where children or young people 
have been harmed or abused 
online, for example by having an 
inappropriate or illegal picture 
posted of  them, they are likely to 
need specialized and long-term 
support or counseling. Profes-
sionals working within social ser-
vices will need to be appropriately 
trained to be able to provide this 
kind of  support.

43



Guidelines for Policy Makers



Guidelines for Policy Makers

Conclusion
The Internet is now the indispens-
able nexus for an array of  digital 
technologies which are transform-
ing economies, opening up an 
array of  possibilities to improve 
people’s lives and to enrich societ-
ies in a variety of  ways. 

At a macro level, it is hugely 
important that the economic 
advantages which the Internet can 
generate are spread evenly across 
the world. The prospect of  a digi-
tal divide growing up between the 
developed world and the industri-
alizing economies, entrenching or 
widening existing disadvantages or 
imbalances, was addressed by the 
WSIS processes. It continues to be 
a	major	feature	of 	policy	discus-
sions within the WSIS Forum24 , 
the Internet Governance Forum 

(IGF)25 and in many related inter-
national fora. 

At the individual level, the Inter-
net has become a tremendously 
enriching and empowering tech-
nology. Children and young peo-
ple	in	particular	have	been	major	
beneficiaries	of 	the	Internet	and	
related digital technologies. These 
technologies are transforming the 
way we all communicate with each 
other and have opened up many 
new	ways	to	play	games,	enjoy	
music and engage in a vast array 
of  cultural activities, dissolving 
many barriers of  time and space. 
Children and young people have 
very often been at the forefront 
of  adopting and adapting to 
the possibilities provided by the 
Internet.

24	 http://www.itu.int/wsis/implementation/2009/forum/geneva/index.html
25 www.intgovforum.org

45

7.



Guidelines for Policy Makers

Yet, it is undeniable that the 
Internet has brought in its wake 
a range of  challenges to chil-
dren’s and young people’s safety 
which need to be addressed, both 
because they are important in 
their own right but also because 
it is important to communicate 
to everyone concerned that the 
Internet is a medium we should 
all be able to trust. Equally it is 
essential that, we collectively do 
not allow an apparent concern to 
protect children and young people 
online to become a platform to 
justify	entirely	unrelated	assaults	
on free speech, free expression or 
the freedom of  association.

It is extremely important for the 
next	generation	to	feel	confident	
about using the Internet in order 
that they can, in turn, continue 
to	benefit	from	its	development.	
Thus, when discussing the safety 
of  children and young people on-
line, it is vital to strike a balance. 

It is essential to discuss openly the 
hazards which exist for children 
and young people online, so we 
can teach them how to avoid the 
risks altogether or teach them 
how to deal with them should 
they nonetheless materialize, how-
ever, we must not do so in a way 
which exaggerates the dangers 
or which is unduly frightening. 
An approach which deals only or 
largely with the negative aspects 
of  the technology is very unlikely 
to be taken seriously by chil-
dren and young people because 
hundreds of  millions of  them 
are already using it everyday and 
they therefore know a great deal 
about what it is and what it can 
be. In this respect parents and the 
members of  older generations can 
often	find	themselves	at	a	disad-
vantage. Here is an instance where 
young people will very often 
know more about the technology 
and its possibilities than their par-
ents and teachers. But knowledge 
is not the same as wisdom.

National governments have an 
obligation to provide for the 
protection of  legal minors in both 
the “real” and “virtual” worlds. 
In an important sense, because 
the new technologies are now so 
thoroughly integrated into the 
lives of  so many children and 
young people in a number of  im-
portant ways, it no longer makes 
sense to try to maintain rigid 
distinctions between “real world” 
events and online events. The two 
are increasingly intertwined and 
interdependent.

National governments and the 
policy making community have a 
major	responsibility	both	to	set	
the framework within which an 
appropriate national and multi-
national response can be devel-
oped and then to sustain it over 
time. In doing so the Internet 
industry itself  and all of  the rel-
evant stakeholders will have very 
important roles to play, not least 
because the speed with which the 

technology can change means that 
many of  the traditional methods 
of  law or policy making no longer 
fit	this	purpose.	As	this	report	has	
shown, the new technologies are 
also making new demands on law 
makers.

46 www.itu.int/cop



Guidelines for Policy Makers

Appendix 1
Contact Offences Against Children and Young People

Children and young people can be 
exposed to a range of  unwanted 
or inappropriate contact on the 
Internet which can have dire con-
sequences for them. Some of  this 
contact might be sexual in nature.

Studies in Europe by EU Kids 
Online	in	2008	reveal	some	dis-
turbing	results	(median	figures):		
15-20%	have	been	bullied,	ha-
rassed	or	stalked	online;	25%	have	
received unwanted sexual com-
ments;	9%	have	met	people	in	
real life whom they had previously 
only known online. Though the 
rates vary by country and region, 
these	figures	demonstrate	that	the	
risks are real.26  One American In-
ternet study27	found	that	32%	of 	
teens online have been contacted 

by a complete stranger, of  those, 
23%	said	they	felt	scared	and	
uncomfortable	during	the	contact;	
and	4%	of 	those	kids	received	ag-
gressive sexual solicitation.

Sexual predators use the Internet 
to contact children and young 
people for sexual purposes, often 
using a technique known as 
“grooming” whereby they gain 
the	child’s	confidence	by	appeal-
ing to his or her interests.  They 
often introduce sexual topics, 
photos and explicit language to 
desensitize, raise sexual awareness 
and soften the will of  their young 
victims.  Gifts, money and even 
tickets for transportation are used 
to persuade and lure the child or 
young person to a place where the 

26	 		EU	Kids	Online	Report,	Comparing	Children’s	Online	Opportunities	and	Risks	Across	Europe,	pages	29-
30,	June	2008.

27	 	Pew	Internet	and	American	Life	Project	2007.

47

predator can sexually exploit him 
or her.  These encounters may 
even be photographed or video-
taped. Children and young people 
often lack emotional maturity 
and self-esteem which makes 
them susceptible to manipulation 
and intimidation.  They are also 
hesitant to tell adults about their 
encounters for fear of  embarrass-
ment or of  losing access to the 
Internet.  In some cases they are 
threatened by predators and told 
to keep the relationship a secret.

Sexual predators learn from one 
another through Internet fora 
and chat rooms.  When commu-
nicating with children and young, 
these predators often pretend to 
be closer to the child’s or young 



48 www.itu.int/cop

Guidelines for Policy Makers

 person’s age than they really are, 
and claim to be seeking friend-
ship.  Once they gain the child’s 
confidence,	they	take	advantage	
of  his or her vulnerabilities — 
such as loneliness or upset over a 
personal loss — to create an emo-
tional dependence on the preda-
tor.  There are numerous media 
reports of  cases where a child or a 
young person has agreed to meet 
face-to-face with someone they 
have been talking to online, and 
who they think is within their age 
group,	only	to	find	that	the	indi-
vidual is an older male interested 
in having sex with them.  Unfor-
tunately, some of  these cases have 
resulted in the victimization and 
sexual	molestation	of 	the	child;	in	
a few cases the outcomes were far 
worse.

A particularly disturbing trend is 
for predators to broadcast sexual 
acts with children or young people 
via real-time webcam video to an 
audience of  other predators — 

often to solicit their approval.  In 
such cases, the child or young 
person not only suffers harmful 
and lasting psychological (and 
sometimes physical) trauma from 
the heinous act but is victimized 
over and over by the posting of  
the images on the Internet where 
they	become	objects	of 	collection	
for other predators.  These new 
images are welcomed and used, 
traded and sometimes sold on the 
Internet to other predators who 
need new material to satisfy their 
sexual fantasies.  Sadly, victims are 
often unable to obtain a sense of  
closure and to get on with their 
lives long after the horrible events 
have occurred because they live in 
constant fear that their image will 
be recognized by others.  Even 
more contemptible is the use of  
these images by the predator to 
“blackmail” the child or young 
people into maintaining silence 
and complying with the ongoing 
abuse.

48 www.itu.int/cop



www.itu.int/cop

Guidelines for Policy Makers

49

Appendix 2
“Child Pornography: Model Legislation & Global 
Review”

With the support of  Interpol 
and Microsoft, the International 
Centre for Missing & Exploited 
Children (ICMEC) reviewed the 
child pornography legislation of  
the	187	Interpol	Member	Coun-
tries and made recommenda-
tions for key concepts that, when 
applied in national legislation, 
would constitute a comprehensive 
legislative strategy to combat child 
pornography.

Unfortunately, the report con-
cluded28 that few of  the world’s 
countries have legislation in place 
that	is	sufficient	to	combat	child	
pornography on some level.

The complete report, which 
is	now	in	its	5th	Edition,	can	
be found at www.icmec.org in 
Arabic, English, French,  Korean, 
Portuguese, Russian, Spanish, 
Thai and Turkish.29

Following is a listing of  Interpol 
Member Countries and the status 
of  their child pornography legisla-
tion.

28   The report concluded that:

	 only	29	have	legislation	sufficient	to	combat	child	pornography	offenses	(5	Interpol	Member	Countries	meet	all	
of 	the	criteria	set	forth	above	and	24	Interpol	Member	Countries	meet	all	but	the	last	criteria,	pertaining	to	ISP	
reporting);	and

	 93	Interpol	Member	Countries	have	no	legislation	at	all	that	specifically	addresses	child	pornography.	

					Of 	the	remaining	Interpol	Member	Countries	that	do	have	legislation	specifically	addressing	child	pornography:

	 54	do	not	define	child	pornography	in	national	legislation;	

	 24	do	not	explicitly	provide	for	computer-facilitated	offenses;	and	

 36 do not criminalize possession of  child pornography, regardless of  the intent to distribute.
29  www.icmec.org



50 www.itu.int/cop

Guidelines for Policy Makers

 = No  = Yes

Global Review
(Reprinted with the permission of  the International Centre for Missing & Exploited Children)

Country Legislation 
Specific 
to Child 
Pornography30

“Child 
Pornography” 
Defined

Computer-
Facilitated 
Offenses31

Simple 
Possession32

ISP 
Reporting33

Afghanistan     
Albania     
Algeria     
Andorra     
Angola     

30	 For	the	purposes	of 	this	report,	we	were	looking	for	specific	laws	that	proscribe	and/or	penalize	child-pornography	offenses.	Mere	labor	legislation	that	simply	bans	
the	“worst	forms	of 	child	labor,”	among	which	is	child	pornography,	is	not	considered	“legislation	specific	to	child	pornography.”	

 Further, countries in which there is a general ban on pornography, regardless of  whether the individuals being depicted are adults or children, are not considered to 
have	“legislation	specific	to	child	pornography,”	unless	there	is	a	sentencing	enhancement	provided	for	offenses	committed	against	a	child	victim.

31	 In	order	to	qualify	as	a	computer-facilitated	offense,	we	were	looking	for	specific	mention	of 	a	computer,	computer	system,	Internet,	or	similar	language	(even	if 	such	
mention	is	of 	a	“computer	image”	or	something	similar	in	the	definition	of 	“child	pornography”).	In	cases	where	other	language	is	used	in	national	legislation,	an	
explanatory footnote is provided.

32 “Simple possession,” for the purposes of  this report, refers to possession regardless of  the intent to distribute.

33 While some countries may have general reporting laws (i.e., anyone with knowledge of  any crime must report the crime to the appropriate authorities), only those 
countries	that	specifically	require	ISPs	to	report	suspected	child	pornography	to	law	enforcement	(or	another	mandated	agency)	are	included	as	having	ISP	reporting	
laws. Note that there are also provisions in some national laws (mostly within the European Union) that limit ISP liability as long as an ISP removes illegal content once 
it	learns	of 	its	presence;	however,	such	legislation	is	not	included	in	this	section.



Guidelines for Policy Makers

51

Country Legislation 
Specific 
to Child 
Pornography

“Child 
Pornography” 
Defined

Computer-
Facilitated 
Offenses

Simple 
Possession

ISP Reporting

Antigua & 
Barbuda     

Argentina     
Armenia     
Aruba     
Australia     

Austria   34  
Azerbaijan     
Bahamas     
Bahrain     
Bangladesh     
Barbados     

34	 Section	207a(1)(3)	of 	the	Austrian	Penal	Code	criminalizes	“mak[ing]	available	in	any other manner…a pornographic depiction of  a minor.” Emphasis added.



52 www.itu.int/cop

Guidelines for Policy Makers

Country Legislation 
Specific 
to Child 
Pornography

“Child 
Pornography” 
Defined

Computer-
Facilitated 
Offenses

Simple 
Possession

ISP Reporting

Belarus     
Belgium   35  

Belize     
Benin     
Bhutan   36  
Bolivia     
Bosnia-
Herzegovina   37  

Botswana     
Brazil     

35	 Article	383bis	of 	the	Belgian	Penal	Code,	as	amended	on	1	April	2001,	criminalizes,	inter alia, the dissemination of  child pornography, thereby including dissemination 
via computers. Letter from Jan Luykx, Deputy Chief  of  Mission, Embassy of  Belgium, Washington, D.C., to Ernie Allen, President and CEO, International Centre for 
Missing	&	Exploited	Children	(Feb.	24,	2006)	(on	file	with	the	International	Centre	for	Missing	&	Exploited	Children).

36	 According	to	Article	225(b)	of 	the	Penal	Code	of 	Bhutan,	“[a]	defendant	shall	be	guilty	of 	the	defense	of 	pedophilia	if 	the	defendant…sells,	manufactures,	distributes,	
or otherwise deals in material that contains any depiction of  a child engaged in sexual contact.” Emphasis added.

37	 Articles	189	and	211	of 	the	Penal	Code	of 	Bosnia-Herzegovina	reference	“other	pornographic	materials”	in	addition	to	photographs	and	audio-visual	tapes.



Guidelines for Policy Makers

53

Country Legislation 
Specific 
to Child 
Pornography

“Child 
Pornography” 
Defined

Computer-
Facilitated 
Offenses

Simple 
Possession

ISP Reporting

Brunei     38

Bulgaria   39  
Burkina-Faso     
Burundi     
Cambodia     
Cameroon     

38	 	While	there	is	no	mandatory-reporting	requirement	specific	to	ISPs,	under	the	laws	of 	Brunei	all	ISPs	and	Internet	Content	Providers	(ICPs)	licensed	under	the	
Broadcasting	(Class	License)	Notification	of 	2001	must	comply	with	the	Code	of 	Practice	set	forth	in	the	Broadcasting	Act	(Cap	181).	ISPs	and	ICPs	are	required	to	
satisfy	the	Minister	responsible	for	broadcasting	matters	that	they	have	taken	responsible	steps	to	fulfill	this	requirement.	Under	the	Broadcasting	Act,	such	Minister	has	
the power to impose sanctions. Content that should not be allowed includes, inter alia, that which depicts or propagates pedophilia. 

 The Licensee must remove or prohibit the broadcast of  the whole or any part of  a program included in its service if  the Minister informs the Licensee that the 
broadcast of  the whole or part of  the program is contrary to a Code of  Practice applicable to the Licensee, or if  the program is against the public’s interest, public 
order, or national harmony, or offends against good taste or decency.

 The Licensee must also assist the Minister responsible for broadcasting matters in the investigation into any breach of  its license or any alleged violation of  any law 
committed	by	the	Licensee	or	any	other	person;	and	shall	also	produce	such	information,	records,	documents,	data,	or	other	materials	as	may	be	required	by	the	
Minister for the purposes of  the investigation. E-mail from Salmaya Salleh, Second Secretary, Embassy of  Brunei, Washington, D.C., to Jessica Sarra, Director of  
Global	Operations,	International	Centre	for	Missing	&	Exploited	Children	(Mar.	21,	2006)	(on	file	with	the	International	Centre	for	Missing	&	Exploited	Children).

39	 	Article	159(3)	of 	the	Bulgarian	Penal	Code,	when	read	in	conjunction	with	Article	159(1),	criminalizes, inter alia, “otherwise circulat[ing]	works	with	a	[child]	
pornography content.” Emphasis added.



54 www.itu.int/cop

Guidelines for Policy Makers

Country Legislation 
Specific 
to Child 
Pornography

“Child 
Pornography” 
Defined

Computer-
Facilitated 
Offenses

Simple 
Possession

ISP Reporting

Canada     40

Cape Verde     
Central 
African 
Republic

    

Chad     
Chile     

40	 While	there	is	no	mandatory	reporting	requirement	specific	to	ISPs,	ISPs	in	Canada	collaborate	with	law	enforcement	and	work	closely	to	facilitate	the	reporting	of 	
offending	material.	Canadian	criminal	law	employs	a	very	broad	definition	of 	“child	pornography,”	which	gives	its	comprehensive	set	of 	offenses	additional	scope.	The	
specific	offenses	of 	transmitting,	making	available,	and	accessing	were	added	in	2002	to	address	the	Internet	context	and	would	apply	to	the	activities	of 	ISPs.	Canada	
also introduced a “notice and takedown” provision for child pornography found on the Internet in that same legislation. Penalties for child pornography offences 
were	enhanced	in	2005	by:	imposing	mandatory	minimum	penalties;	increasing	the	maximum	penalties	on	summary	conviction	from	6	to	18	months	imprisonment;	
making	the	commission	of 	any	child	pornography	offense	with	intent	to	profit	an	aggravating	factor	for	sentencing	purposes;	making	denunciation	and	deterrence	the	
primary	sentencing	objectives	in	any	case	involving	the	abuse	of 	a	child;	and	making	the	abuse	of 	any	child	an	aggravating	factor	for	sentencing	purposes.	In	addition	
to the comprehensive protections found under the criminal law, Canada also has a national, public tipline for reporting online child sexual exploitation (www.Cybertip.
ca)	that	performs	a	triage	function	on	those	reports	for	law	enforcement.	Additionally,	Cybertip.ca	also	maintains	the	Project	Cleanfeed	Canada	database	that	blocks	
approximately	90%	of 	Canadian	subscribers	from	accessing	known	child	pornography	sites	that	may	be	beyond	the	reach	of 	Canadian	prosecution.	Further,	Canada	
has a National Strategy for the Protection of  Children from Sexual Exploitation on the Internet, of  which the National Child Exploitation Coordination Centre 
(Centre) is a key component. The Centre, which is located with the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, coordinates domestic and foreign online child sexual exploitation 
investigation, provides training to Canadian law enforcement, and serves as a central clearing house for reports received from Cybertip.ca. Summary of  letter from 
Carole Morency, A/General Counsel, Criminal Law Policy Section, Department of  Justice Canada, to Jessica Sarra, Director of  Global Operations, International Centre 
for	Missing	&	Exploited	Children	(June	24,	2008)	(complete	letter	on	file	with	the	International	Centre	for	Missing	&	Exploited	Children).



Guidelines for Policy Makers

55

Country Legislation 
Specific 
to Child 
Pornography

“Child 
Pornography” 
Defined

Computer-
Facilitated 
Offenses

Simple 
Possession

ISP Reporting

China41 42  43  
Colombia     

Comoros     
Congo     
Costa Rica     
Côte d’Ivoire     
Croatia     

41 Child pornography legislation in Hong Kong differs from that in China. Legislation in Hong Kong:
	 •	defines	child	pornography;
	 •	criminalizes	computer-facilitated	offenses;	and
	 •	criminalizes	simple	possession	of 	child	pornography.

42	 While	China	does	not	have	any	specific	child-pornography	legislation,	there	is	a	general	prohibition	on	obscene	and	pornographic	materials	in	the	Criminal	Code.	In	
2004,	with	the	aim	of 	better	protecting	minors,	the	Supreme	People’s	Court	and	the	Supreme	People’s	Protectorate	promulgated	an	“Interpretation	On	Several	Issues	
Regarding the Implementation of  Laws in Dealing with Criminal Cases Involving the Production, Duplication, Publication, Sale, Dissemination of  Pornographic 
Electronic Information Using Internet, Mobile Communications Terminals, Radio Stations.” Article 6 of  this Interpretation explicitly stipulates that, “whoever 
disseminates,	duplicates,	publishes,	or	sells	pornographic	electronic	information	that	depicts	sexual	behaviors	of 	adolescents	under	the	age	of 	18,	or	provides	direct	
linkage in the Internet server or websites owned, managed, or used by himself/herself, to the electronic information with the knowledge that such information depicts 
sexual	behaviors	of 	adolescents	under	the	age	of 	18,	shall	be	severely	punished	in	accordance	with	Article	363	of 	the	Criminal	Law	regulating	the	punishment	of 	
crimes of  production, duplication, publication, sale, and dissemination of  pornographic materials, or Article 364 regulating the punishment of  crimes of  dissemination 
of 	pornographic	materials	with	serious	circumstances.”	E-mail	from	Chen	Feng,	Police	Liaison	Officer,	Embassy	of 	the	People’s	Republic	of 	China,	Washington,	
D.C.,	to	Jessica	Sarra,	Director	of 	Global	Operations,	International	Centre	for	Missing	&	Exploited	Children	(Mar.	17,	2006)	(on	file	with	the	International	Centre	for	
Missing & Exploited Children).

43	 The	2004	Interpretation	by	the	Supreme	People’s	Court	and	the	Supreme	People’s	Protectorate	applies	to	computer-facilitated	offenses.



56 www.itu.int/cop

Guidelines for Policy Makers

Country Legislation 
Specific 
to Child 
Pornography

“Child 
Pornography” 
Defined

Computer-
Facilitated 
Offenses

Simple 
Possession

ISP Reporting

Cuba     
Cyprus     
Czech 
Republic     44

Democratic 
Republic of  
Congo

    

Denmark   45  
Djibouti     
Dominica     
Dominican 
Republic     

Ecuador     
Egypt     

44 While there is no ISP-reporting requirement in Czech law, the Czech National Plan on the Fight Against Commercial Sexual Exploitation of  Children, available online 
at	http://www.mvcr.cz/prevence/priority/kszd/en_tab.html,	names	the	Ministry	of 	Transportation	and	Communications	and	the	Ministry	of 	the	Interior	as	the	
national	agencies	charged	with	specifying	the	statutory	obligation	of 	Internet	providers	included	in	the	Telecommunications	Act	(No.	151/2000)	to	file	the	necessary	
data on illegal websites and to hand them over to Czech law enforcement. The expected result of  this measure is to secure “evidentiary facts against those who spread 
child pornography on the Internet.”

45	 Section	235	of 	the	Danish	Criminal	Code	criminalizes, inter alia, dissemination and possession of  “other…visual reproductions” of  pornographic materials concerning 
children	under	the	age	of 	18.



Guidelines for Policy Makers

57

Country Legislation 
Specific 
to Child 
Pornography

“Child 
Pornography” 
Defined

Computer-
Facilitated 
Offenses

Simple 
Possession

ISP Reporting

El Salvador     
Equatorial 
Guinea     

Eritrea     
Estonia   46  
Ethiopia     
Fiji     
Finland   47  
France     

Gabon     
Gambia     
Georgia     

46	 Articles	177	and	178	of 	the	Estonian	Penal	Code	criminalize	using	a	minor	in	“other	works”	or	using	“any	other	manner”	to	manufacture,	store,	hand	over,	display,	or	
make available child pornography.

47	 Chapter	17,	section	18	of 	the	Finnish	Criminal	Act	criminalizes	“any	person	who…otherwise	distributes	obscene	pictures	or	visual	recordings	depicting	children.”



58 www.itu.int/cop

Guidelines for Policy Makers

Country Legislation 
Specific 
to Child 
Pornography

“Child 
Pornography” 
Defined

Computer-
Facilitated 
Offenses

Simple 
Possession

ISP Reporting

Germany     48

Ghana     
Greece   49  
Grenada     
Guatemala     
Guinea     
Guinea Bissau     
Guyana     
Haiti     
Honduras     

48	 While	there	is	no	explicit	obligation	for	an	ISP	to	report	to	law	enforcement	or	another	mandated	agency,	in	most	cases	ISPs	will	file	reports	with	law	enforcement.	It	
is a punishable offense for an ISP that knows of  child pornographic material on its websites to not delete the illegal content. Factors considered include whether it was 
possible and reasonable for the ISP to detect the data and to delete or block it, as there are many ISPs in Germany that offer large storage capacities for commercial 
purposes. E-mail from Klaus Hermann, Counselor/Police Liaison, Embassy of  Germany, Washington, D.C., to Jessica Sarra, Director of  Global Operations, 
International	Centre	for	Missing	&	Exploited	Children	(Feb.	9,	2006)	(on	file	with	the	International	Centre	for	Missing	&	Exploited	Children).

49	 Article	348a	of 	the	Greek	Penal	Code	criminalizes	various	child-pornography	offenses,	including	possession,	purchase,	transfer,	and	sale	of 	child	pornography	“in	any	
way.”



Guidelines for Policy Makers

59

Country Legislation 
Specific 
to Child 
Pornography

“Child 
Pornography” 
Defined

Computer-
Facilitated 
Offenses

Simple 
Possession

ISP Reporting

Hungary   50  
Iceland   51  
India     
Indonesia     
Iran     
Iraq     
Ireland     
Israel     
Italy     
Jamaica     
Japan     

50	 Under	Section	195/A(3)	of 	the	Hungarian	Criminal	Code,	a	person	making,	distributing,	or	trading	pornographic	pictures	of 	a	minor	by	video,	film,	photograph,	or	
“by any other means,” or making such pictures available to the public, commits a felony. Further, according to a recent decision of  the Hungarian Appellate Court 
(Nr.	BH	133/2005),	the	reference	to	“any	other	means”	and	“making	available	to	the	public”	includes	distribution	through	the	Internet.	Letter	from	Viktor	Szederkényi,	
Deputy Chief  of  Mission, Embassy of  the Republic of  Hungary, Washington, D.C., to Jessica Sarra, Director of  Global Operations, International Centre for Missing & 
Exploited	Children	(Feb.	6,	2006)	(on	file	with	the	International	Centre	for	Missing	&	Exploited	Children).

51	 Article	210	of 	the	Penal	Code	of 	Iceland	criminalizes	the	“possession	of 	photographs,	films,	or	comparable items depicting children in a sexual or obscene manner.” 
Emphasis added.



60 www.itu.int/cop

Guidelines for Policy Makers

Country Legislation 
Specific 
to Child 
Pornography

“Child 
Pornography” 
Defined

Computer-
Facilitated 
Offenses

Simple 
Possession

ISP Reporting

Jordan     
Kazakhstan     
Kenya     
Korea     
Kuwait     
Kyrgyzstan     
Laos     
Latvia   52  
Lebanon     
Lesotho     
Liberia     
Libya     

52	 	Article	166(2)	of 	the	Criminal	Law	of 	Latvia	criminalizes	“the	importation,	production,	public	demonstration,	advertising,	or	other distribution of  such 
pornographic… materials as relate or portray the sexual abuse of  children.” Emphasis added.



Guidelines for Policy Makers

61

Country Legislation 
Specific 
to Child 
Pornography

“Child 
Pornography” 
Defined

Computer-
Facilitated 
Offenses

Simple 
Possession

ISP Reporting

Liechtenstein     53

Lithuania     
Luxembourg   54  
Macedonia   55  
Madagascar   56  
Malawi     
Malaysia     
Maldives     
Mali     
Malta     

53	 While	there	is	no	specific	mention	of 	ISP	reporting	in	the	Penal	Code	of 	Liechtenstein,	in	the	draft	of 	the	new	Children	and	Youth	Act,	a	reporting	requirement	is	
foreseen that would apply to “anyone learning of  the endangerment of  the welfare of  a child or young person.” E-mail from Claudia Fritsche, Ambassador, Embassy 
of 	Liechtenstein,	Washington,	D.C.,	to	Jessica	Sarra,	Director	of 	Global	Operations,	International	Centre	for	Missing	&	Exploited	Children	(Feb.	7,	2006)	(on	file	with	
the International Centre for Missing & Exploited Children).

54	 Article	383	of 	the	Penal	Code	of 	Luxembourg	criminalizes	not	only	the	manufacture	and	possession	(for	trade,	distribution,	or	public	display)	of 	“writings,	printings,	
images,	photographs,	films,	or	other objects of  a pornographic nature,” but also the commission of  a variety of  other child-pornography offenses in “any way.” 
Emphasis added.

55	 Article	193(3)	of 	the	Macedonian	Penal	Code	criminalizes	the	abuse	of 	a	“juvenile”	in	the	“production	of…other	objects	with	a	pornography	content.”

56 Article 346 of  the Penal Code of  Madagascar criminalizes the use of  “any means” to disseminate child pornography.



62 www.itu.int/cop

Guidelines for Policy Makers

Country Legislation 
Specific 
to Child 
Pornography

“Child 
Pornography” 
Defined

Computer-
Facilitated 
Offenses

Simple 
Possession

ISP Reporting

Marshall 
Islands     

Mauritania     
Mauritius     
Mexico     
Moldova     
Monaco     
Mongolia     
Montenegro   57  
Morocco     
Mozambique     
Myanmar     
Namibia     
Nauru     

57	 Article	211(2)	of 	the	Penal	Code	of 	Montenegro	criminalizes	“exploit[ing]	a	child	for	the	production	of 	pictures,	audio-visual,	or other items of  pornographic 
content.” Emphasis added.



Guidelines for Policy Makers

63
Country Legislation 

Specific 
to Child 
Pornography

“Child 
Pornography” 
Defined

Computer-
Facilitated 
Offenses

Simple 
Possession

ISP Reporting

Nepal   58  
Netherlands     59
Netherlands 
Antilles 60  61 62 

New Zealand     
Nicaragua     
Niger     
Nigeria     
Norway     
Oman     
Pakistan     

58	 	While	not	specific	to	child	pornography,	section	47	of 	the	Electronic	Transaction	Ordinance	of 	2004	does	prohibit	the	publishing	or	displaying	on	computers,	the	
Internet, or other electronic media, materials that are prohibited by law to be published or displayed because they are against public morality and decency.

59  While there is no legal or contractual obligation for ISPs to report suspected child pornography to law enforcement, Netherlands-based ISPs do have a practice of  
reporting	their	findings	of 	child	pornography	immediately	to	law	enforcement	and	the	ISPs	remove	the	content	from	the	concerned	web	site.	Further,	on	the	request	
of  law enforcement, ISPs hand over their logs concerning the web site(s) under suspicion. E-mails from Richard Gerding, Counselor for Police and Judicial Affairs, 
Royal	Embassy	of 	The	Netherlands,	Washington,	D.C.,	to	Jessica	Sarra,	Director	of 	Global	Operations,	International	Centre	for	Missing	&	Exploited	Children	(Feb.	8,	
2006)	(on	file	with	the	International	Centre	for	Missing	&	Exploited	Children).

60	 	While	legislation	specific	to	child	pornography	does	not	yet	exist,	a	committee	has	been	installed	to	revise	the	current	Netherlands	Antilles	Penal	Code.	Specific	
legislation	on	child	pornography	will	be	introduced	(Proposed	Article	2.13.4).	E-mail	from	Richard	Gerding,	Counselor	for	Police	and	Judicial	Affairs,	Royal	Embassy	
of 	The	Netherlands,	Washington,	D.C.,	to	Jessica	Sarra,	Director	of 	Global	Operations,	International	Centre	for	Missing	&	Exploited	Children	(Feb.	22,	2006)	(on	file	
with the International Centre for Missing & Exploited Children).

61	 	Proposed	Article	2.13.4	would	criminalize	computer-facilitated	offenses.

62	 	Proposed	Article	2.13.4	would	criminalize	simple	possession.



64 www.itu.int/cop

Guidelines for Policy Makers

Country Legislation 
Specific 
to Child 
Pornography

“Child 
Pornography” 
Defined

Computer-
Facilitated 
Offenses

Simple 
Possession

ISP Reporting

Panama     63

Papua New 
Guinea     

Paraguay     
Peru     
Philippines     
Poland     
Portugal   64  
Qatar   65  
Romania     

63	 While	there	is	no	mandatory-reporting	requirement	specific	to	ISPs,	Article	231-I	of 	the	Panamanian	Penal	Code	establishes	that	anyone	who	has	knowledge	of 	the	use	
of 	minors	in	pornography	or	sexual	activities,	whether	the	person	obtained	such	information	by	means	of 	his	or	her	duties,	job,	business,	profession,	or	by	any	other	
means, and fails to report it to the authorities, he or she will be sent to prison for this omission. If  the commission of  the crime (child pornography or sexual activity) 
cannot be proved after the report, the person who reported it will be exempted of  any liability with regards to his or her report to the authorities. E-mail from Isabel 
Fernández,	Embassy	of 	Panama,	Washington,	D.C.,	to	Jessica	Sarra,	Director	of 	Global	Operations,	International	Centre	for	Missing	&	Exploited	Children	(Apr.	12,	
2006)	(on	file	with	the	International	Centre	for	Missing	&	Exploited	Children).

64	 It	can	be	inferred	from	Article	172	of 	the	Portuguese	Penal	Law	that	the	expression	“by	any	means”	allows	a	Prosecutor	to	view	information	and	communication	
technologies	as	a	means	to	commit	the	crime	of 	circulating	images,	sounds,	or	movies	clearly	showing	minors	younger	than	14	years	old	engaged	in	sexual	acts.	Letter	
from Pedro Catarino, Ambassador, Embassy of  Portugal, Washington, D.C., to Ernie Allen, President and CEO, International Centre for Missing & Exploited Children 
(Feb.	22,	2006)	(on	file	with	the	International	Centre	for	Missing	&	Exploited	Children).

65	 Article	292	of 	the	Penal	Code	of 	Qatar	specifically	mentions	“books,	publications,	other written materials,	pictures,	photographs,	films,	symbols,	or	other items.” 
Emphasis added.



Guidelines for Policy Makers

65

Country Legislation 
Specific 
to Child 
Pornography

“Child 
Pornography” 
Defined

Computer-
Facilitated 
Offenses

Simple 
Possession

ISP Reporting

Russia     
Rwanda     
St. Kitts & 
Nevis     

St. Lucia     
St. Vincent 
& the 
Grenadines

    

San Marino     
Sao Tome & 
Principe     

Saudi Arabia     
Senegal     
Serbia   66  
Seychelles     

66	 Article	111a	of 	the	Serbian	Penal	Code	criminalizes	making	a	“photograph,	film,	or some other picture” of  a minor for the purpose of  making an item of  
pornographic	content.	Additionally,	Article	185	criminalizes	using	a	minor	for	producing	“pictures,	audio-visual,	or	other items of  pornography content.” Emphasis 
added.



66 www.itu.int/cop

Guidelines for Policy Makers

Country Legislation 
Specific 
to Child 
Pornography

“Child 
Pornography” 
Defined

Computer-
Facilitated 
Offenses

Simple 
Possession

ISP Reporting

Sierra Leone     
Singapore     
Slovak 
Republic     

Slovenia   67  
Somalia     
South Africa     
Spain   68  
Sri Lanka     
Sudan     
Suriname     
Swaziland     

67	 Article	187(2)	of 	the	Penal	Code	of 	Slovenia	criminalizes	the	abuse	of 	a	minor	“to	produce	pictures,	audio-visual,	or	other items of 	a	pornographic	nature”;	Article	
187(3)	criminalizes	the	actions	of 	anyone	who	“produces,	distributes,	sells,	imports,	exports,	…	or	supplies	[pornographic	material	depicting	minors]	in	any	other	way,	
or who possesses such material with the intention of  producing, distributing, selling, importing, exporting, or supplying it in any other way.” Emphasis added.

68	 Article	189(1)(a)	of 	the	Spanish	Penal	Code	criminalizes	using	a	minor	“to	prepare	any type	of 	pornography	material”;	Article	189(1)(b)	criminalizes	producing,	selling,	
distributing,	displaying,	or	facilitating	the	production,	sale,	dissemination,	or	exhibition,	of 	“any	type”	of 	child	pornography	by	“any	means”;	and	Article	189(7)	repeats	
the “any type” and “any means” language previously used. Emphasis added.



Guidelines for Policy Makers

67

Country Legislation 
Specific 
to Child 
Pornography

“Child 
Pornography” 
Defined

Computer-
Facilitated 
Offenses

Simple 
Possession

ISP Reporting

Sweden   69  70

Switzerland     
Syria     
Tajikistan     
Tanzania     
Thailand     
Timor Leste     
Togo     
Tonga     
Trinidad & 
Tobago     

69 Swedish criminal legislation is, in principle, formulated so that it will apply regardless of  technical prerequisites. The criminalization of  child pornography is no 
exception	and	accordingly,	Chapter	16,	Section	10a,	of 	the	Swedish	Penal	Code	extends	to	computer-facilitated	offenses.	Letter	from	Anette	Nilsson,	First	Secretary,	
Embassy	of 	Sweden,	Washington,	D.C.,	to	Jessica	Sarra,	Director	of 	Global	Operations,	International	Centre	for	Missing	&	Exploited	Children	(Feb.	23,	2006)	(on	file	
with the International Centre for Missing & Exploited Children).

70	 In	1998,	Sweden	enacted	the	Bulletin	Board	System	(BBS)	Liability	Act	(1998:112),	which	aims	to	prevent	the	spread	of 	child	pornography	by	obligating	BBS	providers	
to supervise BBS content. BBS providers are also obligated to remove or in some other way prevent the dissemination of  messages with a criminal content, including 
those with child pornography. Letter from Anette Nilsson, First Secretary, Embassy of  Sweden, Washington, D.C., to Jessica Sarra, Director of  Global Operations, 
International	Centre	for	Missing	&	Exploited	Children	(Feb.	23,	2006)	(on	file	with	the	International	Centre	for	Missing	&	Exploited	Children).



68 www.itu.int/cop

Guidelines for Policy Makers

Country Legislation 
Specific 
to Child 
Pornography

“Child 
Pornography” 
Defined

Computer-
Facilitated 
Offenses

Simple 
Possession

ISP Reporting

Tunisia   71  
Turkey     
Turkmenistan     
Uganda     
Ukraine     
United Arab 
Emirates     

United 
Kingdom72     

73

United States     
Uruguay   74  
Uzbekistan     

71	 Article	234	of 	the	Tunisian	Penal	Code	criminalizes,	inter	alia,	the	use	of 	“any	visual	recordings	or	photographs”	depicting	pornographic	images	of 	children.

72 For the purposes of  this report, the United Kingdom includes England and Wales.

73 The United Kingdom operates a voluntary “notice and takedown” procedure overseen by the Internet Watch Foundation (IWF), an independent industry-funded 
body,	endorsed	by	the	police	and	government.	U.K.	ISPs	“take	down”	images	of 	child	pornography	when	notified	of 	them	by	IWF.	Failure	to	do	so	could	make	them	
liable to prosecution. Letter from Tony Lord, First Secretary, Justice & Home Affairs, Embassy of  Great Britain, Washington, D.C., to Ernie Allen, President and CEO, 
International	Centre	for	Missing	&	Exploited	Children	(Feb.	9,	2006)	(on	file	with	the	International	Centre	for	Missing	&	Exploited	Children).

74	 Law	17.815	of 	the	Oriental	Republic	of 	Uruguay	criminalizes	certain	child-pornography	offenses	regardless	of 	how	they	are	committed	(i.e.,	Article	1:	“in	any	way	
makes	or	produces	child	pornography”;	Article	2:	“in	any	way	facilitates	the	commercialization,	diffusion,	exhibition,	storage,	or	acquisition	of 	child	pornography”).



Guidelines for Policy Makers

69

Country Legislation 
Specific 
to Child 
Pornography

“Child 
Pornography” 
Defined

Computer-
Facilitated 
Offenses

Simple 
Possession

ISP Reporting

Vatican City 75    76

Venezuela     
Vietnam     
Yemen     
Zambia     
Zimbabwe     

75	 In	the	absence	of 	specific	child-pornography	legislation,	such	cases	may	be	delegated	to	the	Italian	judiciary	system	at	the	request	of 	the	Holy	See.

76	 “The	Holy	See	has	no	Internet	Service	Provider	external	to	it	and	the	navigation	from	the	internal	provider	has	filters	which	impede	not	only	access	to	any	sites	related	
to child pornography, but also online distribution of  pornographic material. Given that the Holy See’s web site is institutional, only those issues which are inherent to its 
mission…can be found there.” Letter from Archbishop Pietro Sambi, Apostolic Nuncio, Apostolic Nunciature, United States of  America, to Ernie Allen, President and 
CEO,	International	Centre	for	Missing	&	Exploited	Children	(June	5,	2006)	(on	file	with	the	International	Centre	for	Missing	&	Exploited	Children).



70 www.itu.int/cop

Guidelines for Policy Makers

Appendix 3
Child Safety Software

There are many software pack-
ages and technical tools avail-
able on the market that can help 
screen out unwanted and un-
desirable content and contacts, 
help limit the amount of  time a 
computer can access the Internet 
or limit the applications which 
can run on a particular com-
puter or device. Some operating 
systems also include such tools 
as part of  their standard provi-
sion. Typically these functions 
will underpin or supplement 
the key safety messages that are 
common to Internet safety cam-
paigns in all parts of  the world.  
Safety software of  this type 
is widely used in schools and 
public libraries, and is similar to 
those that employers may deploy 
on their internal networks to 
limit inappropriate or non-work 
related use of  the Internet dur-
ing working hours.

The effectiveness of  child safety 
software can vary enormously 
and in some countries efforts 
have been made to introduce 
a “seal of  approval” to give a 
basic level of  quality assurance 
that will help parents, teachers, 
children and young people to 
choose a programme that best 
meets their needs and is likely to 
work	in	an	efficient	and	easy	to	
understand way.

It should always be noted that, 
sooner or later, every device will 
fail and that software can malfunc-
tion. To that extent parents, teach-
ers, children and young people 
should never entirely delegate 
their responsibilities to safety 
programmes. Such programmes 
should always been seen as 
complementary to sound educa-
tion and awareness programmes 
designed to ensure that a child or 

young person knows how to avoid 
online hazards, or knows how to 
deal with them should they arise.

Examples of  currently available 
child safety software packages 
include:

Free Products
1.	 K9	Web	Protection	(http://

www.k9webprotection.
com/)

2.	 SafeFamilies	(http://www.
safefamilies.org/download.
php)

3. File Sharing Sentinel (http://
www.akidthaine.com/)

4. B-Gone (http://support.
it-mate.co.uk/?mode= 
Products&p= bgone)

5.	 The	latest	versions	of 	
Windows and Mac OS also 
include tools which can be 
used without any further 
payment

Commercial Products
•	 Net Nanny Parental Con-

trols
•	 Safe Eyes
•	 CYBERsitter
•	 WiseChoice.net
•	 CyberPatrol
•	 MaxProtect
•	 FilterPak
•	 Netmop
•	 imView
•	 McAfee Parental Controls
•	 Norton Parental Controls
•	 Child Safe
•	 ContentProtect Security Ap-

pliance
•	 http://www.cybersentinel.

co.uk/

For a more detailed list of  both 
commercial and free products see 
www.getnetwise.org. 



Guidelines for Policy Makers

71

Appendix 4
Developing a National Strategy

The Internet has made possible 
a range of  ways of  abusing chil-
dren and young people, e.g., via 
web cams and chat rooms, which 
were simply impossible before 
its arrival as a mass consumer 
product.  The internet has also 
played a singular role in expand-
ing the scale on which CAM has 
become available in all parts of  
the world. For these reasons, 
when addressing online safety 
concerns for children and young 
people policy makers may wish 
to give particular consideration 
to some or all of  the following:

1. Outlawing “grooming” or 
other forms of  remote en-
ticement of  legal minors into 
inappropriate sexual contact or 
sexual activity.

2. Outlawing the possession, 
production and distribution of  
CAM, irrespective of  the intent 
to distribute.  

3. Taking additional steps to 
disrupt	or	reduce	the	traffic	in	
CAM, for example by establish-
ing a national hotline and by 
deploying measures which will 
block access to web sites and 
Usenet Newsgroups known to 
contain or advertise the avail-
ability of  CAM.

4. Ensuring that national pro-
cesses are in place which ensure 
that all CAM found in a country 
is channelled towards a centra-
lised, national resource. 

5. Developing strategies to ad-
dress the demand for CAM par-
ticularly among those who have 
convictions for such offences. 
It is important to build aware-

ness of  the fact that this is not 
a victimless crime: children are 
abused to produce the material 
being viewed and by intentional-
ly viewing or downloading CAM 
one is contributing directly to 
the abuse of  the child depicted 
and one is also encouraging the 
abuse of  more children to pro-
duce more pictures.

6. Building awareness of  the fact 
that children can never consent 
to being sexually abused, wheth-
er for the production of  CAM 
or in any other way.  Encourage 
people who use CAM to seek 
help, while at the same time, 
making them aware that they will 
be held criminally responsible 
for the illegal activity in which 
they engaged/are engaging. 

7. Ensuring that law enforce-
ment crime prevention strate-
gies as well as school-based 

and social programmes include 
sections on cybersafety and the 
risks posed by online predatory 
behaviour, with age appropriate 
advice.

8.Considering other strategies to 
address the demand for CAM. 
For example, some countries 
maintain a register of  convicted 
sex offenders. Courts have is-
sued	judicial	orders	banning	
such offenders from using the 
Internet altogether or from us-
ing parts of  the Internet which 
are frequented by children and 
young people. The problem with 
these orders hitherto has been 
one of  enforcement. However, 
in some countries consideration 
is being given to integrating the 
list of  known sex offenders into 
a block list which will prevent 
those	on	it	from	visiting	or	join-
ing certain web sites, for exam-



72 www.itu.int/cop

Guidelines for Policy Makers

72
ple web sites known to be visited 
by large numbers of  children 
and young people. Of  course 
if 	the	offender	joins	a	web	site	
while using a different name or 
fake log-in the effectiveness of  
such measures can be greatly 
reduced but by criminalising this 
behaviour a further deterrent 
can be established.

9. Providing appropriate long-
term support for victims. Where 
children or young people have 
been victimized online, where 
for example an illegal image 
of  them has appeared on the 
Internet, they will naturally feel 
very concerned about who might 
have seen it and what impact this 
will have on them. It could leave 
the child or young person feel-
ing vulnerable to bullying or to 
further sexual exploitation and 
abuse. In that context it will be 
important for there to be profes-
sional support services available 
to support children and young 
people	who	find	themselves	in	
these circumstances. Such sup-
port may need to be provided on 
a long-term basis.

10. Ensuring that a mechanism 
is established and is widely 
promoted to provide a readily 
understood and rapid means for 
reporting illegal content or il-
legal or worrying online behav-
iour e.g. a system similar to that 
which has been established by 
the Virtual Global Taskforce, 
http://www.virtualglobaltask-
force.com. The use of  the IN-
TERPOL	i24/7	system	should	
be encouraged. 

11.	Ensuring	that	a	sufficient	
number of  law enforcement of-
ficials	are	appropriately	trained	
in investigating Internet and 
computer-based crime and have 
access to appropriate forensic fa-
cilities to enable them to extract 
and interpret relevant digital 
data.

12. Investing in training for 
law enforcement, prosecutorial 
and	judicial	authorities	in	the	
methods used by online crimi-
nals to perpetrate these crimes. 
Investment will also be needed 
in acquiring and maintaining 
the facilities necessary to obtain 
and interpret forensics evidence 

from digital devices. In addition 
it will be important to establish 
bilateral and multilateral collabo-
ration and information exchang-
es with relevant law enforcement 
authorities and investigative 
bodies in other countries.



www.itu.int/cop

Photo	credits:	www.shutterstock.com,	Violaine	Martin/ITU,	Ahone	Ayeh	Njume-Ebong/ITU	



Guidelines for 
Policy Makers on
Child Online 
Protection 

International Telecommunication Union
Place des Nations
CH-1211 Geneva 20
Switzerland
www.itu.int/cop

Printed in Switzerland
Geneva, 2009

(((

(((

(((

(((

CHIS     CHIS     
With the support of:

www.itu.int/cop


