







































Information
Security

Governance

IPPF –  Practice Guide  



About IPPF

The International Professional Practices Framework (IPPF) is the conceptual framework that organizes authoritative guidance 
promulgated by The Institute of Internal Auditors. IPPF guidance includes:

Mandatory Guidance

Conformance with the principles set forth in mandatory guidance is required and essential for the professional practice of internal 
auditing. Mandatory guidance is developed following an established due diligence process, which includes a period of public expo-
sure for stakeholder input. The three mandatory elements of the IPPF are the Definition of Internal Auditing, the Code of Ethics, 
and the International Standards for the Professional Practice of Internal Auditing (Standards).

Element Definition

Definition The Definition of Internal Auditing states the fundamental purpose, nature, and scope of internal 
auditing.

Code of Ethics The Code of Ethics states the principles and expectations governing behavior of individuals and 
organizations in the conduct of internal auditing. It describes the minimum requirements for 
conduct and behavioral expectations rather than specific activities.

International Standards Standards are principle-focused and provide a framework for performing and promoting internal 
auditing. The Standards are mandatory requirements consisting of:

•	 	Statements	of	basic	requirements	for	the	professional	practice	of	internal	auditing	and	for	
evaluating the effectiveness of its performance. The requirements are internationally appli-
cable at organizational and individual levels. 

•	 		Interpretations,	which	clarify	terms	or	concepts	within	the	statements.	

It is necessary to consider both the statements and their interpretations to understand and apply 
the Standards correctly. The Standards employ terms that have been given specific meanings that 
are included in the Glossary.

Strongly Recommended Guidance

Strongly recommended guidance is endorsed by The IIA through a formal approval processes. It describes practices for effective 
implementation of The IIA’s Definition of Internal Auditing, Code of Ethics, and Standards. The three strongly recommended 
elements of the IPPF are Position Papers, Practice Advisories, and Practice Guides.

Element Definition

Position Papers Position Papers assist a wide range of interested parties, including those not in the internal audit 
profession, in understanding significant governance, risk, or control issues and delineating related 
roles and responsibilities of internal auditing.

Practice Advisories Practice Advisories assist internal auditors in applying the Definition of Internal Auditing, the 
Code of Ethics, and the Standards and promoting good practices. Practice Advisories address 
internal auditing’s approach, methodologies, and consideration but not detail processes or proce-
dures. They include practices relating to: international, country, or industry-specific issues; specific 
types of engagements; and legal or regulatory issues.

Practice Guides Practice Guides provide detailed guidance for conducting internal audit activities. They include 
detailed processes and procedures, such as tools and techniques, programs, and step-by-step 
approaches, as well as examples of deliverables.

This GTAG is a Practice Guide under IPPF.

For other authoritative guidance materials, please visit www.theiia.org/guidance/.



Global Technology Audit Guide (GTAG®) 15 
Information Security Governance

June 2010

Copyright © 2010 by The Institute of Internal Auditors located at 247 Maitland Avenue, Altamonte Springs, FL 32701, USA.  
All rights reserved. Published in the United States of America.

Except for the purposes intended by this publication, readers of this document may not reproduce, store in a retrieval system,  
redistribute, transmit in any form by any means — electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise — display, rent,  

lend, resell, commercially exploit, or adapt the statistical and other data contained herein without the permission of The IIA.

The information included in this document is general in nature and is not intended to address any particular individual, internal  
audit activity, or organization. The objective of this document is to share tools, resources, information, and/or other knowledge that is  

accurate, unbiased, and timely. However, based on the date of issuance and changing environments, no individual, internal audit 
activity, or organization should act on the information provided in this document without appropriate consultation or examination.

Authors:

Paul Love, CISSP, CISA, CISM

James Reinhard, CIA, CISA

A.J. Schwab, CISA

George Spafford, CISA



GTAG — Table of Contents

ExEcutivE SummAry .........................................................................................................................................1

introduction ....................................................................................................................................................2
 2.1. What is Information Security Governance? .............................................................................................................. 2
 2.2. What is Effective Information Security Governance? .............................................................................................. 3
 2.3. What is Efficient Information Security Governance? ............................................................................................... 5
 2.4. Why Should the CAE Be Concerned About Information Security Governance? ................................................... 6

thE intErnAl Audit Activity’S rolE in informAtion SEcurity GovErnAncE .....................7
 3.1. The Internal Audit Activity’s Responsibilities Related to Information Security Governance ............................... 7
 3.2. Auditor Background and Experience Level .............................................................................................................. 7
 3.3. Audits of Information Security Governance ............................................................................................................. 7

AuditinG informAtion SEcurity GovErnAncE ...................................................................................9
 4.1. Auditing Information Security Governance – Planning .......................................................................................... 9

4.2. Auditing Information Security Governance – Testing ........................................................................................... 11
4.3. Auditing Information Security Governance – Analyzing ....................................................................................... 14

concluSion/SummAry ...................................................................................................................................17

AppEndix – SAmplE Audit QuEStionS/topicS ........................................................................................18

rEfErEncES .........................................................................................................................................................19

AuthorS And rEviEwErS ..............................................................................................................................20



1

GTAG — Executive Summary

1

1.  Executive Summary

Multiple definitions of information security governance (ISG) 
exist across organizations and standard-setting bodies. 
Common ISG themes include:

•	 Promoting	 good	 information	 security	 (IS)	 practices	
with clear direction and understanding at all levels.

•	 Controlling	IS	risks	associated	with	the	business.
•	 Creating	an	overall	IS	activity	that	reflects	the	orga-

nization’s needs and risk appetite levels.

One	way	to	depict	ISG	is	demonstrated	in	Figure	1	(Page	
2).	IS	is	an	important	part	of	the	enterprise’s	overall	gover-
nance and is placed in the middle of IT governance, IT 
operations	 (i.e.,	 current	 state	 of	 IT),	 and	 IT	 projects	 (i.e.,	
future	 state	of	 IT).	 Figure	1	 represents	 a	 traditional	model	
for IS in many organizations. The trend of the IS field is for 
ISG to have a role in IT and within the organization. IS 
always will have a special relationship with IT because of the 
amount of data that information systems have as well as the 
impact of losing that information as opposed to paper-based 
business processes. While the information both processes 
hold is important to the IS practitioner, in terms of sheer 
impact, the IT loss would be dramatically more significant. 
There are no right or wrong governance models; each orga-
nization is different as is its needs and risk tolerance.

Boards of directors and executive management must 
support the ISG structure. The board provides overall 
strategic guidance to management who must carry out the 
board’s directives through day-to-day management and stra-
tegic initiative alignment. Effective and efficient IS requires 
both governance and management actions.

To improve corporate governance, the board should 
establish oversight of business/organizational risks including 
IS as part of the charter of the board’s risk committee 
or another committee under the board’s purview. The 
internal	audit	activity	(IAA)	should	support	the	designated	
board committee by assuring relevant policies, procedures, 
and practices pertaining to IS are in place and operating 
effectively.
The	chief	audit	executive	(CAE)	has	responsibility	within	

an organization to provide assurance over the management 
of major risks, including IS risks. Information is a signifi-
cant component of most organizations’ competitive strategy 
either by the direct collection, management, and interpreta-
tion of business information or the retention of information 
for day-to-day business processing. Some of the more obvious 
results of IS failures include reputational damage, placing the 
organization at a competitive disadvantage, and contractual 
noncompliance. These impacts should not be underesti-
mated. If an organization depends on the faith and trust of its 
customers, a minor breach can shake customer confidence to 
the point of loss of business. IS typically is not a reason that 
customers choose to create or renew a business relationship 

with an organization, but failing to meet customer expec-
tations for IS controls can cause a current customer to not 
renew a business relationship or deter a potential customer 
from forging a new relationship.

The IAA should support the ISG process to the extent 
allowed by its charter and The IIA’s International 
Professional	Practices	Framework	(IPPF).	This	participation	
will likely include activities such as:

•	 Assessing	the	degree	to	which	governance	activities	
and standards are consistent with the IAA’s under-
standing of the organization’s risk appetite.

•	 Consulting	 engagements	 as	 allowed	 by	 the	 audit	
charter and approved by the board.

•	 Ongoing	 dialogue	 with	 the	 ISG	 activity	 to	 ensure	
that substantial organizational and risk changes are 
being addressed in a timely manner.

•	 Performing	formal	audits	of	the	ISG	activity	that	are	
consistent with The IIA’s International Standards for 
the Professional Practice of Internal Auditing (Standards) 
Standard 2110.A2: “The internal audit activity must 
assess whether the information technology gover-
nance of the organization sustains and supports the 
organization’s strategies and objectives.1”

Audits of ISG primarily should focus on the organization’s 
implementation of ISG practices, which include clearly 
defined policies, roles and responsibilities, risk appetite 
alignment, effective communication, tone at the top, and 
clear accountability.
This	 Global	 Technology	 Audit	 Guide	 (GTAG)	 will	

provide a thought process to determine what matters to the 
organization. This GTAG also will assist the CAE in incor-
porating an audit of ISG into the audit plan focusing on 
whether the organization’s ISG activity delivers the correct 
behaviors, practices, and execution of IS.

Core objectives of this GTAG include:
1. Define ISG.
2. Help internal auditors understand the right  

  questions to ask and know what documentation  
  is required.

3. Describe the IAA’s role in ISG.
 

 1 These preliminary discussions may seem familiar to readers of 
GTAG-9: Identity and Access Management, which recommends 
that, “Prior to conducting an IAM [identity and access manage-
ment] audit, auditors need to understand the organization’s  
existing IAM structure, such as the company’s business  
architecture and IAM policies, as well as the laws, regulations,  
and mandates for which compliance is necessary.” A key  
distinction between IAM and ISG is that governance is  
inherently a strategic activity where access and identity  
management is largely operational/tactical in nature.



2

GTAG —  Introduction

2. Introduction

2.1.  What is Information    
Security Governance?

The IIA’s IPPF provides the following definition of 
Information	Technology	(IT)	Governance:

Information Technology Governance consists of leader-
ship, organizational structures, and processes that ensure the 
enterprise’s information technology sustains and supports the 
organization’s strategies and objectives.

The IPPF does not provide a specific definition for ISG. 
However, one way to depict ISG is demonstrated in Figure 
1	(below).	IS	is	an	important	part	of	the	enterprise’s	overall	
governance,	IT	operations	(i.e.,	current	state	of	IT),	and	IT	
projects	(i.e.,	future	state	of	IT).	(Note:	The	authors	are	not	
suggesting that IT is the only area where ISG should be prac-
ticed, but in terms of impact of control failure, it should be 
one	of	the	first	areas	of	focus.)

 
Figure 1. Information Security Governance Triangle

The term ISG can be widely interpreted. Various security 
organizations and standard-setting bodies have their own 
definitions and guidance surrounding ISG2.  Common ISG 
themes among these security organizations and standard-
setting bodies include promoting good IS practices with clear 
direction and understanding from the top down, controlling 
security risks associated with the business, and sustaining an 
overall IS activity that reflects the organization’s needs and 
risk appetite levels. An organization develops a framework 
and reporting structure to address ISG and while formalized 
documented policies may exist, reporting lines to the organi-
zation’s defined governance bodies can be formal or informal. 
The importance of the informal reporting lines should not be 

underestimated because many activities in an organization 
occur outside the formal structures.

IT management literature commonly commingles the 
concepts of governance and management to the detriment 
of both because roles and responsibilities are no longer 
clear. Governance typically has a board that is responsible 
for setting the organization’s strategy and goals. As part of 
this, the board focuses on strategy, risk management, and 
leadership. Oversight of management and direction of the 
organization are central to governance.

In contrast, management is tasked with using resources, 
including financial and labor, to accomplish and safeguard 
stated objectives in the identified timeframe. The board does 
not manage the day-to-day activities of management but 
strives to ensure that the desires of investors and other key 
stakeholders are met. For example, pressures from investors 
to improve quarterly earnings can cause the board to be at 
odds with management. The segregation of duties between 
the board and management provides a key control to safe-
guard the goal of maximizing return on shareholder equity 
and balancing it with indentifying and managing risks.

The Information Security Practical Guidance on How to 
Prepare for Successful Audits, from the IT Compliance 
Institute, provides some clarification of the board’s and exec-
utive management’s roles in ISG. The document states that 
the board should “provide oversight at a level above other 
business managers. The board members’ role in information 
security is to ask managers the right questions and encourage 
the right results.” The document notes that the board must 
provide the appropriate tone at the top for IS. Conversely, 
the document states “executive management must provide 
leadership to ensure that information security efforts are 
supported and understood across the organization, demon-
strating by example that mandate of security policies.” Figure 
2	(Page	3)	 is	 reprinted	 from	the	IT	Compliance	Institute’s	
guidance and further outlines the roles of the board and 
executive management, as well as presents the roles of line 
managers	 and	 internal	 auditors.	 (Note:	 Additionally,	 the	
authors of this GTAG would add “establish the risk appetite” 
as	 part	 of	 the	 board	 of	 directors’	 roles	 in	 Figure	 2.)	 Figure	
3	 (Page	 4),	 taken	 from	 GTAG-1: Information Technology 

EVALUATE

Corporate
Governance

IT
Governance

IT
Operations

IT
Projects

Information
Security

Enterprise Governance

DIRECT MONITOR

2 Examples include the Information Security Forum’s The Standard 
of Good Practice for Information Security;	Australian	Standard	(AS)	
11770.1-2003, Information Technology — Security Techniques 
— Key Management; the Software Engineering Institute’s 
Governing for Enterprise Security Implementation Guide; the 
National	Institutes	of	Standards	and	Technology’s	Program Review 
for Information Security Management Assistance (PRISMA); and 
Information	Security	Management	Series	(ISO	27000)	published	
jointly by the International Organization for Standards and the 
International Electrotechnical Commission.



3

GTAG — Introduction

Information Security Responsibilities

Board of Directors •	 Provide oversight.
•	 Communicate business imperative.
•	 Establish and oversee security policy.
•	 Define corporate security culture.

Executive Management •	 Provides leadership.
•	 Ensures IS efforts are supported and understood across the organization.
•	 Dedicates sufficient resources to be effective.
•	 Advances the goal of security oversight and promote continuous 

improvement and success.

Staff and Line-of-Business Managers •	 Contribute to design and implementation of IS activities. 
•	 Review and monitor security controls.
•	 Define security requirements.

Internal Auditors •	 Assess information control environments, including understanding, 
adoption, and effectiveness.

•	 Validate IS efforts and compare current practices to industry standards
•	 Recommend improvements.

Figure 2. Information Security Responsibilities3

Controls, further describes a typical structure of a public 
company’s board, standing committees, and specific execu-
tive	management	roles	(e.g.,	CEO,	CFO,	CIO)	that	could	be	
part of any organization’s ISG program.

In regards to IS, it must be recognized as a key risk manage-
ment activity. “Security is a state of being free from doubt or 
danger. Information security involves protection of informa-
tion	assets	(whether	in	digital,	physical,	or	human	form)	and	
information	systems	from	damage,	misuse,	or	attack	(whether	
in	 storage,	 processing,	 or	 transit),	 resulting	 in	 information	
being stable, reliable, and free of failure.”4

Effective IS requires both governance and management 
actions. The board needs IS to help mitigate and report on 
confidentiality, integrity, and availability risks to the organi-
zation’s goals. To improve corporate governance, the board 
would typically establish oversight of IS as part of the charter 
of the board’s risk committee or another committee within 
the board’s structure. If the business units and the IT services 
that create and store data do not provide the degree of 
confidentiality, integrity, and availability expected by stake-
holders, customers, or regulating entities, then unacceptable 
risks likely will exist. In most cases, the lowest common 
threshold is always compliance with the law, which will help 
the IS practitioners understand the lower bar that should 
never be breached. The internal auditor should confirm that 
relevant policies, procedures, and practices pertaining to IS 
are in place.

Management will then create an IS organizational struc-
ture5 and budget that are commensurate with the direction 
set forth by the risk committee, or other such forum, and 
the board. In absence of specific direction, management 
should understand the compliance aspects and use that as 
the minimum threshold to fill any vacuums that may exist 
with guidance from the top. Audits provide assurance that 
management has implemented and is sustaining both an 
effective IS activity and overall compliance with IS policies.

2.2.  What is Effective Information 
Security Governance?

An effective ISG program:
•	 Involves	appropriate	organizational	personnel.
•	 Defines	a	governance	framework	or	methodology.

3  Excerpt from the IT Compliance Institute’s Information Security 
Practical Guidance on How to Prepare for Successful Audits.
www.t2pa.com/analysis-a-advice/library/179-it-audit-check- 
list-information-security

4 Bihari, Endre. Information Security Definitions, 2003. 
www.perfres.net

 5 This can include a separate IS activity as well as embedding IS 
responsibilities into existing roles as long as accountability is clear. 
The structure is organizational-dependent.



4

GTAG —   Introduction

•	 Enables	 uniform	 risk	 measurement	 across	 the	
organization.

•	 Produces	quantifiable,	meaningful	deliverables.
•	 Reflects	business	priorities,	organizational	risk	appe-

tites, and changing levels of risk.

The ISG activity needs to involve 
appropriate organizational personnel. 
This	 personnel	 includes	 the	 board	 (as	 discussed	 in	 section	
2.1)	and	executive	management	from	whom	internal	auditors	

must elicit commitment and financial and political support. 
The IS department will provide standards/baseline tools 
and processes to support the execution of the IS activity. 
Privacy, compliance, legal, and IT functions should partici-
pate in this program to ensure that information assets are 
adequately indentified and managed according to relevant 
outside	 expectations	 (e.g.,	 current	 and	 future	 customers,	
regulators, stakeholders, and others who are relevant to the 
organization’s	long-term,	strategic	goals).	Finally,	the	human	
resources function should assist in communicating uniform 
standards to all employees and in providing uniform guid-
ance in disciplinary activity associated with violation of 
the IS mandates. Without the appropriate support of these 

Description of Various Board Standing Committees and Executive Management

Audit Committee The role of the audit committee encompasses oversight of financial issues, 
internal control assessment, risk management, and ethics.

Governance Committee The governance committee is responsible for board member selection and 
assessment and for leadership of the board’s operations.

Risk Management Committee The risk management committee is responsible for oversight of all risk anal-
ysis and assessment, risk response, and risk monitoring.

Finance Committee The main role of the finance committee is to review financial statements, 
cash flow projections, and investment management. Members of this 
committee need to understand the control elements of IT that ensure the 
accuracy of information used to make key financing decisions and generate 
financial reports.

Chief Executive Officer (CEO) The CEO has overall strategic and operational control of the organization 
and must consider IT in most aspects of the role.

Chief Financial Officer (CFO) The CFO has overall responsibility for all financial matters in the organi-
zation and should have a strong understanding of the use of IT to enable 
financial management and to support corporate objectives.

Chief Information Officer (CIO)
The CIO has overall responsibility for the use of IT within the organization.

Chief Security Officer (CSO) The CSO is responsible for all security across the entire organization, 
including IS, which also may be the responsibility of a chief information 
security	officer	(CISO).	Additionally,	as	discussed	in	GTAG-6: Managing 
and Auditing IT Vulnerabilities, the CISO supports activities such as effective 
vulnerability management and helping to align technical risks with business 
risks.

Chief Legal Counsel (CLC) The CLC may be an employee, an officer of the organization, or an external 
legal adviser.

Chief Risk Officer (CRO) The CRO is concerned with managing risk at all levels of the organization. 
Because IT risks form a part of this function, the CRO will consider them 
with the help of the CISO.

Figure 3. Roles of the Governance Bodies and Functions6 

 6 GTAG-1: Information Technology Controls



5

GTAG — Introduction

groups, the ISG activity may devolve into IS management 
and become an operational/tactical, rather than strategic, 
activity.

The ISG activity defines an appropriate framework 
or methodology to guide its activities. 
Examples of governance frameworks can be found in GTAG-
11: Developing the IT Audit Plan or the IT Governance 
Institute’s Information Security Governance: Guidance for 
Boards of Directors and Executive Management, 2nd Edition. 
These frameworks help ensure that the organization oper-
ates within a structured, consistent, objective, and effective 
manner that can be easily explained to stakeholders, regu-
latory agencies, service providers, and other outside parties. 
Well-planned frameworks also can guide future business 
changes and activities by ensuring that proposed activities 
are considered according to the same criteria as existing 
activities. Using a framework allows an organization to 
benefit from leading practices developed over time.

Uniform IS risk evaluations are also 
an element of effective ISG. 
Like all business activities, IS activities must be prioritized. 
Deploying uniform risk measurement tools across the orga-
nization helps ensure that the areas of highest IS risk can 
be clearly identified. Risk evaluation tools should establish 
thresholds to distinguish inherent risk across the environ-
ment. An organization may, for example, choose to leave 
systems	as-is	(i.e.,	accept	risk)	if	acceptable	thresholds	have	
not been exceeded. This can begin as a simple assessment of 
risk at a very high level, such as a simple document outlining 
the	 high-level	 risks.	 (Note:	 It	 is	 expected	 that	 these	 tools	
will evolve, but the authors have seen very complicated, 
quantitative methods used to implement a risk evaluation 
process that never bears any value due to the sheer number 
of	 risks	any	organization	 takes	 in	 its	day-to-day	activities.)	
It is crucial that management provide the appropriate time 
and resources to allow the activity to develop naturally 
throughout the organization.

The ISG activity should yield quantifiable 
and measurable deliverables.7

Qualitative data can be useful in management activities, 
but quantitative data offers improved tracking and trending 
capabilities that are not available through qualitative 
measures. Quantitative measures could include the number 
of policies and standards delivered, the number of significant 
security events occurring, and results of corporate security 
training programs. This does not mean that qualitative 
results have no value; qualitative data without appropriate 
quantitative supporting data diminishes the perceived value 
of the information provided. A mixture of quantitative and 
qualitative measures taken together provide the insight into 
the IS activity of which management needs to make appro-
priate decisions. However, a successful ISG activity should 

be driven by fact-based, objective metrics with appropriate 
risk analysis performed by IS professionals who understand 
the organization.

The ISG activity should adapt its priorities 
based on legal, regulatory, and business 
changes, and deploy policies and standards 
that reflect the organization’s risk appetite and 
are practical, reasonable, and enforceable. 

Successful businesses are rarely static. They face changing 
external conditions such as competition, regulation, 
evolving business models, and changes in supply chains. The 
ISG team needs to understand and support these activities. 
As an example, if the organization expands to add a new 
business activity, the impact must be fully considered. Does 
it introduce new regulations? Does it introduce new inherent 
risks? Does it alter the state of existing business functions? 
The ISG activity also should reflect ongoing changes within 
established businesses. Legacy business activities are also 
subject to emerging regulations and emerging threats. If the 
organization does not adapt its governance and management 
activities to reflect these changes, it may not survive. As 
noted in GTAG-11: Developing the IT Audit Plan, 36 percent 
of internal auditors now re-perform their risk assessments 
more than once per year. This reflects how rapidly changes 
in risk can occur.8

2.3.  What is Efficient Information 
Security Governance?

An efficient ISG activity will reflect the concept of propor-
tionality by:

•	 Encouraging	a	tiered	structure	of	internal	control.
•	 Adjusting	 reporting	 based	 on	 the	 level	 of	manage-

ment involved.
•	 Allow	 for	 properly	 approved	 deviations	 to	 policies	

and standards.

An efficient ISG activity encourages 
proportional control.
This means providing greater control for higher impact activ-
ities and more valuable assets. It also encourages less control 

7 Examples of deliverables and metrics can be found in the 
National	Institute	of	Standards	and	Technology’s	The Performance 
Measurement Guide for Information Security (Special	Publication	
800-55	Revision	1).

8 IPPF Standard 2010: Planning — “The chief audit executive 
must establish risk-based plans to determine the priorities of the 
internal audit activity, consistent with the organization’s goals.” 
IPPF Standard 2010.A1 — “The internal audit activity’s plan 
of engagements must be based on a documented risk assessment, 
undertaken at least annually.”



6

GTAG — Introduction

for lower risk activities and less valuable assets. Unless 
compelled by regulation or external certification authorities, 
an organization would not typically spend money to further 
control low-risk activities.

Proportional control should be observed 
in the design of reporting. 
Reporting on the state of IS within the organization should 
vary depending on the organizational levels involved. IS 
violations will probably occur routinely in any sizeable 
organization. The types of infractions will vary from less 
threatening	 (e.g.,	 improper	 use	 of	 a	 single	 letter)	 to	 very	
threatening	 (e.g.,	 loss	 of	 protected	 customer	 data	 through	
electronic	 breach).	 Executive	 management	 should	 be	
substantially involved in major security events, but likely will 
only be aware of more routine security violations through 
the trending of aggregate statistics. Mid-level management 
or line management may, however, be substantially involved 
in these more routine events to identify trends.

An efficient ISG activity is adaptable enough to 
handle systems that cannot cost-effectively or 
technically conform to policies and standards. 
When controls cannot be cost-effectively implemented and 
alternate solutions are not available, an efficient governance 
structure provides a structured mechanism for deviating 
from policies and standards. This mechanism will typically 
include formal risk acceptance with documentation that 
records the analysis that has been performed to demonstrate 
that management has acted in an informed manner; which is 
prudent and appropriate in proportion to the business value 
to be received. This also will include re-evaluation of devia-
tions on a regular basis to ensure the deviation from policy 
is still appropriate and warranted or if the factors within the 
organization have increased to warrant revocation of the 
deviation	(e.g.,	aggregated	risk	has	increased,	cost	of	control	
has	decreased,	new	control	option	exists).

2.4.  Why Should the CAE Be 
Concerned About Information 
Security Governance?

Information is a significant component of most organiza-
tions’ competitive strategy whether it is strategic business 
plans or customers’ personally identifiable information 
(PII).	The	loss	of	this	information	could	have	a	significant	
detrimental impact on the organization. As mentioned 
previously, for most organizations, IS is generally not a 
reason why one organization is chosen over another, but the 
loss of information can have significant impact on current 
and future business opportunities. In addition to direct loss, 
there are issues around the loss of integrity/fidelity of infor-
mation, especially when it comes to financial reporting, 
thefts of money, or disruption of service. Some of the more 
obvious consequences of failing to ensure that management 

is keeping its responsibilities regarding IS in context with 
organizational needs are:

•	 Regulatory actions. Many organizations handle some 
form	of	PII,	Protected	Health	Information	(PHI),	or	
other	 regulated	 information	 (e.g.,	 prerelease	 infor-
mation)	 for	 their	 customers	 or	 employees.	 In	many	
jurisdictions, this type of information is heavily 
regulated. In addition to the well-known PII issues, 
the loss of data or compromised data integrity could 
present a serious problem in the confidence of the 
financial	statements	or	other	issues.	Noncompliance	
has multiple penalties that may detrimentally affect 
the organization.

•	 Reputational damage. Organizations that have signifi-
cant IS breaches often face a negative reaction from 
their customers.

•	 Competitive advantage. The compromise of competi-
tive strategies, pricing, customer and partner 
information, and other key corporate information 
can jeopardize an organization’s ability to compete 
against other organizations that do not have 
compromises.

•	 Contractual noncompliance. Contracts increasingly 
contain stipulations for the protection of information. 
A breach could result in the loss of key contracts, and 
customers, as well as civil suits.

•	 Inaccurate or incomplete data. Organizations must 
provide, store, and retain accurate and complete 
information. Inaccurate or incomplete informa-
tion may result from simple errors to outright fraud. 
Regardless of the cause, governance efforts should 
include information integrity.

•	 Fraud. Failure to implement adequate IS will 
increase the likelihood of successful fraud against the 
organization.

Beyond the items listed, the CAE has a responsibility to the 
board of directors to provide assurance on the effective and 
efficient achievement of ISG objectives, as well as help the 
board ensure that the IT activity can execute its fiduciary 
duties to stakeholders. For these reasons, the IS activity must 
be a consideration in the execution of the IAA’s mandate.

 



7

GTAG — The Internal Audit Activity’s Role
in Information Security Governance

3. The Internal Audit    
 Activity’s Role in Information  
 Security Governance 

As noted in IPPF Standard 2130.A1:
The internal audit activity must evaluate the adequacy  

and effectiveness of controls in responding to risks within the 
organization’s governance, operations, and information systems 
regarding the:

•	 Reliability	 and	 integrity	 of	 financial	 and	 operational	
information.

•	 Effectiveness	and	efficiency	of	operations.
•	 Safeguarding	of	assets.
•	 Compliance	with	laws,	regulations,	and	contracts.

Also, as noted in IPPF Standard 2110.A2:
The internal audit activity must assess whether the information 

technology governance of the organization sustains and supports 
the organization’s strategies and objectives.

The CAE must include these expectations in planning 
ISG audits. Reliability and integrity, safeguarding, and 
compliance are typically associated with IS management, 
but effectiveness and efficiency should be factored into 
the risk appetite of the board as well as allow the IAA to 
determine whether governance activities result in properly 
controlled, under-controlled, or over-controlled systems 
and workflows. Properly controlled systems are both effec-
tive and efficient in providing reliability, safeguarding, and 
compliance. Under-controlled systems may be efficient but 
also may be less effective — especially during periods of vola-
tility. Over-controlled systems, or those with more controls 
than warranted by the associated potential loss, may be more 
effective, but not as efficient. The IAA needs to ensure that 
the ISG activity is both effective and efficient in addressing 
confidentiality, integrity, availability safeguarding, and 
compliance. However, the effectiveness of a control is always 
the most important consideration.

3.1. The Internal Audit Activity’s 
Responsibilities Related to 
Information Security Governance

While the IAA cannot establish organizational structures, 
approve methodologies, or write policies, it can challenge 
them and should support the ISG activity to the extent 
allowed by the internal audit charter and the IPPF. This 
participation will likely include activities such as:

•	 Assessing	the	degree	to	which	governance	activities	
and standards are consistent with the IAA’s under-
standing of the organization’s risk appetite.

•	 Consulting	engagements	 as	 allowed	by	 the	 internal	
audit charter and approved by the board.

•	 Ongoing	 dialogue	 with	 the	 ISG	 activity	 to	 ensure	
that substantial organizational and risk changes are 
being addressed in a timely manner.

•	 Formal	audits	of	the	ISG	activity	consistent	with	IIA	
Standard 2110.A2.

3.2.  Auditor Background and 
Experience Level

To perform an effective audit of an ISG activity, one must 
be an experienced auditor with an understanding of ISG 
concepts. Instead of a checklist approach, an ISG audit 
will require the auditor to interpret and understand the 
organization’s ISG activities. The CAE should ensure the 
IAA possesses the resources and competencies necessary to 
evaluate IS and associated risk, including both internal and 
external risk exposures and those relating to the organiza-
tion’s relationships with outside entities. The CAE may need 
to rely on staff that has experience working with security and 
executive management. In small audit functions, the CAE 
may be actively involved in this process. The staff should 
have an understanding of the existing governance structure 
and possess adequate relationship management skills to form 
effective working relationships with the security manage-
ment leadership and governance structure.

3.3.  Audits of Information 
Security Governance

An audit of the ISG activity could take several forms:
•	 The	most	basic	ISG	engagement	would	be	to	bench-

mark the ISG activity against independent standards.9  
This level of review provides some assurance on how 
comprehensively management has defined an ISG 
framework but does not actually test how strictly 
implemented processes conform to the framework. A 
benchmarking engagement could provide an effec-
tive starting point in a multiyear audit plan because 
it allows management time to address design flaws 
in the governance structure before additional audit 
testing occurs. This approach can also help the CAE 
to ensure that IAA resources are being efficiently 
managed because conformance testing will not occur 
until the IAA has reasonable assurance that the 
program meets basic expectations.

•	 Once	the	CAE	is	sufficiently	satisfied	with	the	design	
of the ISG activity, audit testing should focus on the 
degree to which the program has been executed. This 
type of auditing could include reviews of management 

9  The internal auditor also may want to verify whether manage-
ment is benchmarking and, if so, consider the benchmarking 
activities.



8

GTAG —  The Internal Audit Activity’s Role
in Information Security Governance

reporting, approval and documentation of excep-
tions, consistency of risk assessments, effective use 
of metrics, timely updates based on emerging busi-
ness needs and external changes, review of minutes 
of board and committee meetings, business strate-
gies and plans, business changes, and interviews with 
management members.

•	 Finally,	 the	 IAA	 ultimately	 should	 examine	 the	
degree to which other auditable entities provide 
adequate ongoing support to the ISG activity. This 
likely will involve specific test steps in other audits 
such as assessing whether possible security events are 
properly documented, escalated, responded to, and 
managed by support teams and reviews of IS risk in 
each of the strategic business processes. While this 
could be construed as auditing IS activities instead of 
governance, observing the degree to which organiza-
tions, and their departments or functions, understand 
and conform to the expectations established by the 
governance process is imperative to understanding 
true ISG effectiveness. For example, if the help desk 
under-reports 50 percent of improper use activities, 
the organization as a whole will dramatically under-
estimate its true risk profile and may ultimately fail to 
achieve key business objectives as a result.



9

GTAG — Auditing Information Security Governance

4. Auditing Information   
 Security Governance 

4.1. Auditing Information Security 
Governance – Planning

To effectively and efficiently audit an ISG activity, an audit 
plan — which will test the aspects identified as most impor-
tant by the IAA with input from the audit committee and 
management — must be created and maintained. To do this, 
the IAA must consider an organization’s structure, purpose 
and objectives, lines of communication, risk appetite, level of 
integration with other business units, and external pressures.

4.1.1.  Understand the Information Security 
Governance Organizational Structure

The first step is to assess the organizational structure in 
support of the IS activity. Care must be taken to understand 
the formal reporting structure as the IS activity typically 
will need to be high enough within the organizational hier-
archy to exert influence and avoid conflicts of interest. For 
example, the head of IS may report to the CIO, CFO, or the 
enterprise-level CSO, thus reducing any potential conflicts 
of interest when functioning within lower levels of the 
organization.

The IS activity likely will have formal reporting lines to 
key stakeholders per organizational policies. This includes 
the board and/or committees, corporate counsel, regulatory 
compliance, and so on. Ideally, these structures should be 
formally documented. The internal auditor should collect 
information on both the formal and informal reporting struc-
tures to understand the political nuances and organizational 
priority that management has placed on the activity.

An additional dimension to assess is the level of depth and 
breadth in the governance structure and the level of resil-
ience the organization appears to have should key persons in 
the governance structure be unavailable. For example, what 
would happen to IS if the CIO or CSO were to be dismissed? 
How would the governance structure react and what would 
be the impact?

This evidence can be collected by requesting organiza-
tional charts, job descriptions, and corporate IS policies, as 
well as interviews with C-level executives and the heads of 
the audit and risk committees.

Questions to ask:
1. Who is formally responsible for IS?
2. Where is he or she located within the organizational 

diagram?
3. To whom does this person formally report?
4. To whom does this person have a dotted line 

responsibility?
5. Are there any committee functions, boards, or other 

groups that IS staff regularly reports to either on an 
informational basis or a more formal steering function?

6. What is the career level of the person in charge of IS? 
Is this an officer-level position or a managerial posi-
tion? Does this individual have other roles?

7. Are roles and responsibilities, accountability, and 
performance for all IS responsibilities formally 
defined?

8. How are conflicts of interest avoided?
9. Is the CSO driving the IS activity or mostly reporting 

compliance?
10. Does an IS forum exist? If so, what is its role?

4.1.2.  Understand the Purpose and Objectives 
of Each Component of the Environment

Once the governance structure is understood, documents 
that support management’s assertions need to be collected 
and evaluated. The intent is to validate that discussions are 
occurring in a manner commensurate with the desires of the 
board and executive management.

Examples of documentation to collect include IS poli-
cies, charters, objectives, relevant job descriptions, minutes 
of governance or board meetings where security governance 
is discussed, incident response evidence handling docu-
mentation, retention policies, process narratives, training 
materials, etc.

Questions to ask:
1. Are roles and responsibilities for the IS activity 

formally defined?
2. How are business unit and/or individual performance 

objectives tied to IS objectives? Do they support the 
IS activity?

3. Does each component of the ISG structure have 
sufficient capital and operating expense budgets to 
support IS efforts?

4. Are procedures in place to oversee IS incidents 
including public and investor relations and coordina-
tion with law enforcement?

5. Are IS policies supported by written standards? Are 
the standards supported by written procedures?10

4.1.3.  Understand the Documented Communication 
That Occurs Among Reporting Lines

Policies, standards, and procedures should outline infor-
mation exchanges that should transpire between the IS 
department and other groups, such as the audit committee. 
An internal auditor should collect data to assess whether 
the exchanges are taking place as intended and that there 
are not unintended obstacles — political, technical, etc. 
For example, if the organization is a highly structured, regi-
mented organization, does the CSO have appropriate access 

10 The auditor should see a clear link between the IS 
policies, standards, and procedures where the policies  
drive the standards.



10

GTAG — Auditing Information Security Governance

work with management, development, project management, 
server engineering, network and desktop engineering, release 
management, business continuity, business process owners, 
and other groups to help them achieve their objectives. 
These objectives must include the security of information 
commensurate with management’s intent as codified in 
policies.

An internal auditor can review and use the organizational 
chart and interview business units to determine whether 
the IS activity has met with each business unit to establish 
mutual integration requirements both for the unit and for 
IS. Policies should set the review cycle and meeting minutes 
or other summary reports should exist to establish the 
go-forward plans.

Questions to ask:
1. Is IS a consideration in other business units’ strategy, 

processes, and procedures? Has the IS activity added 
value?

2. Is IS a consideration in the organization’s IT strategy?
3. Is there a formal meeting schedule?
4. What are the meeting agenda items? Are actions 

taken, or do issues lack progress?

4.1.6.  Understand External Influences 
That Could Affect the Information 
Security Governance Structure

As the risk environment changes, so too should the controls, 
processes, and structure. Such external influences include:

•	 Regulatory changes. There are laws and data privacy 
regulations that require an organization to comply 
with certain mandates that may, or may not, align 
with the organization’s short-term objectives. 
Noncompliance	may	 result	 in	 fines,	 civil	 suits,	 and	
damage to the brand.

•	 Evolving industry standards. There are multiple 
industry forces, such as Payment Card Industry Data 
Security	 Standards	 (PCI-DSS)	 or	 BITS	 Product	
Certification	(formerly	Banking	Industry	Technology	
Secretariat),	 requiring	 compliance	 to	 conduct	 busi-
ness with critical partners. Understanding these 
needs and the risks of not complying must be taken 
into consideration to avoid detrimental impact.

•	 Legal developments. There are risks that arise from 
contracts as well as from the legal environment. For 
example, the payment card industry has contractual 
requirements that organizations processing credit 
cards must follow. In addition, organizations need to 
understand the legal environment to avoid civil suits 
relating to negligence and other potential issues.

•	 Dynamic market forces. There are risks that arise from 
the direction of the market. For example, the move-
ment to electronic commerce creates security risks 
for organizations to mitigate.

to the decision makers? The policies and procedures should 
identify criteria for escalation in the event of certain situa-
tions such as unavailability of staff and abnormal business 
conditions.

Whenever possible, feedback loops should be formally 
identified and documented. Instead of the IS activity sending 
reports with no return communication, there ideally should 
be a dialogue wherein the receiver acknowledges receipt and 
addresses any questions. This helps reinforce accountability 
for IS activities.

Questions to ask:
1. What information exchanges are formally defined?
2. Are they sufficient?
3. Are they taking place according to schedule?
4. Does the IS activity get effective/meaningful feed-

back from the groups it works with?
5. What is the escalation path that IS news/alerts must 

follow?

4.1.4. Understand the  Organization’s Risk Appetite
If possible, the internal auditor needs to interview the board 
to understand its risk appetite.  This relates to the level of 
risk that the board deems acceptable in terms of the organi-
zation and should be reflected in the organization’s culture 
and management’s level of risk appetite. Additionally, the 
internal auditor may find other corroborative evidence that 
reflects the organization’s risk appetite by reviewing written 
policies covering risk, circumstances which need to be esca-
lated to the board, and incidents that should be reported to 
the executive level.

Some boards are very risk averse and tend to be conserva-
tive in the creation and protection of value. Other boards 
may accept high levels of risk in the pursuit of larger returns. 
An understanding of the board’s perspectives on risk will set 
the broad context for ISG.

The internal auditor needs to understand the materiality 
threshold that warrants engaging the board. Additionally, 
broad guidelines around types of incidents for engaging the 
board should be established. Organizational policies should 
identify these incidents, as well as the correct escalation 
paths, communication plans, and so on.

Questions to ask:
1. Under what circumstances does the board need to be 

engaged?
2. What is the organization’s materiality threshold?
3. What are the IS risks that the board would deem 

unacceptable?
4. How often is this criteria reviewed?

4.1.5.  Understand Integration of Information  
Security Governance Within the Organization

The IS activity is best enacted through integration with an 
organization’s other business units. In other words, the IS 
activity in isolation cannot secure an organization. It must 



11

GTAG — Auditing Information Security Governance

Questions to Confirm Concerns

•	 Are there any questions regarding the regulatory 
requirements of the organization’s industry? Are 
you satisfied with the types of communication you 
are receiving about the organization’s regulatory 
compliance?

•	 What are our risk appetite levels? What is our 
priority: confidentiality, integrity, or availability? If 
all three are important, which is the priority when 
all three are a consideration? How much confiden-
tiality	 do	 you	 want	 (e.g.,	 a	 high	 assurance	 of	 zero	
records	lost,	which	is	expensive)?

•	 Is there something of which we need to be aware to 
avoid	 negligence	 (e.g.,	 lack	 of	 compliance	 due	 to	
insufficient	protection	of	consumers’	information)?

•	 Are there trends in our industry of which we should 
be aware? What level of assurance are our competi-
tors seeking? What has happened within our 
industry that warrants a reaction? Are there industry 
best practices, recommended guidelines, or regula-
tory	requirements	to	which	we	need	to	adhere	(e.g.,	
BITS,	PCI-DSS)?

•	 Is the board satisfied with the way management is 
assessing and reporting on risk? If not, what infor-
mation does it need to be successful in assessing 
the direction of the IS activity? Are there practices 
that board members or management have seen else-
where that might be worth introducing into this 
organization?

•	 Is there any other reason we should be concerned 
(e.g.,	strategic	direction)?	

Figure 4. Questions to Confirm Concerns

Responses can vary based on the organization and will 
include both internal and external business concerns. 
Examples of concerns could include profit, brand protection, 
liability, intellectual property, or regulatory compliance. 
Responses also could be organization- or industry-specific. 
For example, a charitable organization may be more inter-
ested in investment risk than profits. Responses also may 
include discussions of external relations and regulatory 
compliance, including concern of external reputational risk.

Based on this inquiry process, the internal auditor will 
develop a situational awareness of the ISG structure. 
Next,	 the	 internal	auditor	will	need	 to	determine	whether	
responses align with the governance structure including its 
charters, objectives, policies, and other supporting documen-
tation. The internal auditor should then compare responses 
to the reporting structure and related supporting documenta-
tion, as well as identify areas where alignment does or does 
not occur.

Questions to ask:
1. What regulations, laws, and contractual requirements 

apply to the organization?
2. How often, and when, were regulations last reviewed 

to understand IS requirements? Is the legal depart-
ment involved in the review, or is interpretation left 
to non-legal staff?

3. Is there an internal or external regulatory compliance 
group, and when did the IS activity last meet with 
them?

4. What regulations are costly and operationally 
inefficient?

5. What contracts have IS components?
6. When did the IS activity last review contractual 

requirements with legal counsel?
7. Does legal counsel consult with the IS activity to 

assess requirements during the contract process?
8. What legal contracts are most burdensome, and why?
9. When did the IS activity last review the legal envi-

ronment with legal counsel?
10. What legal environment issues affect ISG and why?
11. When did the IS activity last meet with marketing 

and strategy groups to understand what is happening 
in the market?

12. What market forces affect ISG and why?

4.2.  Auditing Information Security 
Governance – Testing

Based on what the internal auditors learned from reviewing 
the organization’s documentation, they should confirm and 
validate their understanding with key people within the ISG 
structure. This validation will help auditors identify whether 
the organization’s documentation is factual and whether 
stakeholders’ perceptions are correct.

4.2.1. Confirm Stakeholder Concerns
The internal auditor needs to confirm — with all identified 
persons, activities, or committees within the ISG struc-
ture — what is important to protect. Once confirmed, the 
internal auditor can then determine whether all parts of the 
governance structure are aligned.

As previously mentioned, the internal auditor should 
first confirm high-level concerns with the organization’s 
governing board. Then, the internal auditor should proceed 
down the ISG structure. Inquiries should specifically address 
what each person, activity, or committee is worried about as 
it	relates	to	the	business	and	ISG.	Figure	4	(right)	presents	
suggested questions to confirm concerns.



12

GTAG — Auditing Information Security Governance

efficient. These examples provide users within a governance 
structure the opportunity to establish informal communica-
tion channels that allow them, within their perception, to 
be more efficient and effective than if they followed formal 
processes. Control breakdowns may result if formal reporting 
and communication processes are not followed. Therefore, 
the internal auditor needs to be aware of these and should 
consider potential opportunities for business improvements 
by incorporating some of the informal processes into the 
formal structure or helping reestablish situational awareness 
of what is lost when formal processes are not followed.

Sometimes as relationships become established within an 
organization’s formal reporting process, requirements break 
down as casual conversation takes its place. Also, individuals 
within the chain of command may become more familiar 
with each other and therefore circumvent formal reporting 
lines to speed up the communication efforts. As the internal 
auditor becomes aware of these situations, opportunities to 
remind individuals of why formal communication processes 
exist may become necessary as not following procedures 
could result in breakdowns in internal controls.

The internal auditor also must be keenly aware of orga-
nizational politics. Formal processes attempt to dissuade 
use of political perceptions by requiring specific reporting 
and communications to occur within a defined chain of 
command. Politics in any organization are inevitable, but 
formal processes should help ensure that political pressure or 
perceptions are minimized.

Deviations from formal communication and reporting 
lines are areas the internal auditor can use to provide feed-
back as opportunities for business improvement. Evaluation 
and consideration of alternatives will allow the internal 
auditor to complete his or her evaluation and provide appro-
priate recommendations.

4.2.3.  Confirm Key Performance 
Indicators and Their Use

Key	performance	 indicators	 (KPIs)	 are	 a	 form	of	 reporting	
that organizations can use to monitor IS. KPIs relate to the 
COSO model’s Information and Communication compo-
nent where data is collected and disseminated based on 
formal reporting lines. Managers then use the reported 
results for timely follow-up activities.

KPIs are useful to the organization to show how facets 
of an activity or process are working. KPIs can be used to 
measure a number of items, such as efficiency and effec-
tiveness, compliance, and organizational performance. The 
organization should define the ranges of acceptable and 
unacceptable	key	results	(e.g.,	the	minimum	and	maximum	
performance measures for each of the chosen indicators that 
are	considered	acceptable).	Once	KPIs	 are	established	and	
data is collected, an evaluation should occur and the organi-
zation should decide how the results are to be used.

The resultant picture will allow the internal auditor 
to summarize and make appropriate recommendations 
regarding the ISG structure. Variances may occur between 
what is documented and what actually is occurring. These 
differences could be the result of formal practices that are too 
cumbersome or have not been modified as the organization 
changes. The organization itself will usually adapt and create 
new practices that may not be documented but may be more 
efficient and effective in achieving the same objectives as 
stated by the current formal written documents. The internal 
auditor needs to evaluate each of these variances to verify 
that current practice achieves the organizational objectives 
and are in fact operating more efficiently and effectively. If 
current processes deviate from documented expectations, the 
auditor must determine whether the differences are intended 
to circumvent that governance structure or whether docu-
mentation is simply out of date.

4.2.2.  Confirm Reporting and Communication Lines
Information and communication is one of the compo-
nents of the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the 
Treadway	 Commission	 (COSO)	 model.	 Communication	
and reporting relationships within the organization should 
be formally defined and processes — that allow for effective 
communication up and down the chain of command — 
within the organization should exist. These processes should 
include procedures for identifying, capturing, and reporting 
pertinent information related to IS within a defined time 
frame that allows users within the ISG activity to respond 
and carry out their responsibilities.

The internal auditor needs to confirm whether these 
formal reporting and communication relationships occur as 
identified in the organization’s documentation and are effec-
tive. Confirmation can occur through inquiry and review of 
documentation. The internal auditor could use the informa-
tion and communication component of the COSO model 
as he or she reviews and evaluates the organization’s formal 
communication and reporting relationships.

When reviewing the formal reporting relationships, the 
internal auditor must be cognizant of other communication 
lines that are not documented as part of the formal ISG struc-
ture because informal communication lines could be a sign of 
ineffective reporting and communication. These communi-
cation lines may develop over time from perceived inefficient 
formal reporting lines or communication methods, relation-
ships among various individuals within the ISG structure, or 
political perceptions.

Organizations could be overburdened with formally 
defined reporting and communication requirements such 
as requiring minutes of every committee that meets or 
requiring documentation for all communications in a speci-
fied manner. Users could get bogged down or frustrated 
with having to communicate through an entire chain of 
command for some small item when calling someone is more 



13

GTAG — Auditing Information Security Governance

actually is performed. Some items for the internal auditor to 
consider include:

•	 Does	 actual	 practice	 provide	 better	 controls	 or	 a	
more efficient and effective process than what is 
documented?

•	 Why	do	differences	exist?
•	 What	 really	 is	 the	 best	 practice	 to	 use	—	 what	 is	

documented or what is currently in practice?

The internal auditor’s recommendations will depend on 
the overall controls within the governance structure and 
how each variance from the documented process affects the 
structure. In the end, the final documentation should align 
with the agreed practices.

4.2.5.  Confirm Alignment of Risk Appetite
The IIA’s Standards define risk appetite as the level of risk 
that an organization is willing to accept. The internal 
auditor needs to confirm that all the facets of the governance 
structure, including regulatory and contractual areas of inte-
gration, align with the organization’s acceptable risk appetite. 
As discussed in section 4.2.4, the supporting documenta-
tion should also align with the organization’s risk appetite. 
Additionally, as should be noted in the organization’s policy, 
the board needs to be engaged at the appropriate level in 
overseeing and defining the organization’s risk appetite, 
which should be defined at the board level and flow from the 
top to the bottom of the organization. The board also should 
make formal statements that may not be specific to ISG but 
do reflect the organization’s overall risk appetite.

In some organizations, a statement of risk appetite may not 
exist. In this case, the internal auditor will need to glean this 
information from corroborative evidence or through direct 
inquiry of the board. In practice, the internal auditor should 
understand the organization’s risk appetite as knowledge of 
this subject usually is required to complete the annual risk 
assessment or the organization’s enterprise risk management 
activities. If not formally defined, the internal auditor may 
wish to suggest that the board formally defines a statement 
of risk appetite.

Specific risk tolerance levels may be defined by manage-
ment at specific levels within the ISG activity. All risk 
tolerance levels defined by management should align with 
the organization’s risk appetite. In some organizations, the 
board and executive management could have the same toler-
ance level, but other management levels may have increased 
risk tolerances. Variances can occur, but overall, the internal 
auditor should ensure that specific defined risk tolerances are 
within the parameters defined by the board’s risk appetite.

If the internal auditor concludes that the organization’s 
risk tolerances as defined by management are not aligned, 
then he or she should consider appropriate suggestions. 
Additionally, prior to making recommendations, the internal 
auditor should consider all corroborative evidence.

The	 National	 Institutes	 of	 Standards	 and	 Technology’s	
(NIST’s)	 Performance Measurement Guide for Information 
Security	(Special	Publication	800-55	Revision	1)	discusses	a	
collection of three types of measures:

•	 Implementation	measures	to	ascertain	the	execution	
of a security policy.

•	 Effectiveness/efficiency	measures	to	gauge	the	results	
of security delivery service.

•	 Impact	measures	to	weigh	business	or	mission	conse-
quences of security events.

The guidance further clarifies these measurement catego-
ries and provides examples of each.
Auditors	could	perform	a	review	of	the	above	NIST	guid-

ance prior to commencing a review of the ISG activity 
specific to KPIs. Internal auditors could use the guidance 
as a basis to evaluate whether the KPIs are comprehensive. 
Consideration of the previously collected organizational 
information will assist the internal auditor in assessing 
whether the KPIs are relevant.

To evaluate the KPIs, the internal auditor needs to under-
stand them and their intent. Some questions the internal 
auditor should consider include:

•	 What	is	being	measured?	Why,	and	how?
•	 Given	the	organization	and	what	is	being	measured,	

do the KPIs make sense?
•	 Are	the	KPIs	driving	desired	behavior?
•	 Does	 a	 feedback	 loop,	 which	 provides	 input	 for	

continuous improvement, exist?

If the internal auditor concludes that the KPIs are valid, 
then he or she should use these to assess the effectiveness of 
the IS activity and its governance structure. Additionally, 
this process may allow the internal auditor to obtain a better 
understanding of the effectiveness of the organization’s infor-
mation and communication systems. The internal auditor 
also may want to understand the manner in which the data 
is accumulated for the KPIs, the how and to whom they are 
reported, and what management does with the final results.

By obtaining an understanding of the validity of the KPIs, 
the resulting manager follow-up, and improvement efforts, 
the internal auditor will have a better picture of the overall 
effectiveness of the ISG activity.

4.2.4.  Confirm Alignment of Supporting 
Documentation With Governance Structure

By this time in the review, the internal auditor should have 
a fairly good understanding of the organization’s ISG activity 
and related supporting documentation. Based on interviews 
and other testing evidence, the auditor also should be able to 
identify where the documentation differs from actual prac-
tice. In addition, the internal auditor should identify and 
further explain the variance between what is stated and what 



14

GTAG — Auditing Information Security Governance

•	 Third,	 the	 internal	auditor	 should	 identify	whether	
ownership is clearly assigned based on position/role 
in the organization. Policies, procedures, and stan-
dards should assign responsibility for an activity to a 
single individual rather than a group of people. That 
individual may work with a larger group to execute 
his or her assigned work, but based on an assigned 
role, the individual should still be responsible for 
ensuring that a specific ISG activity is actually taking 
place.

•	 Fourth,	 the	 internal	 auditor	 must	 evaluate	 situ-
ations in which there are broad assignments of 
accountability. Many general policies and standards 
stipulate that all users are accountable for an activity. 
Examples include safeguarding assigned credentials 
(e.g.,	 username	and	password),	 protecting	 customer	
data, and using business assets appropriately. Yet, 
these statements do not produce real accountability if 
the users lack sufficient training to reasonably comply 
with the expectations or if enforcement of the stan-
dards is inconsistent across the organization. Policies 
and standards must be supported through sufficient 
training and be applied consistently.

•	 Fifth,	the	internal	auditor	needs	to	identify	whether	
there are appropriate consequences for failure to 
conform to policies, standards, and procedures that 
reflect management’s directives.

The current state of an organization’s IS activity should be 
measured for good or recommended practices. One method 
is to evaluate the program against independent standards 
that are relevant to IS. In fact, The IIA’s IPPF states: “In 
planning the engagement, internal auditors must consider 
… the adequacy and effectiveness of the activity’s risk 
management and control processes compared to a relevant 
control framework or model.” The scoping decisions made in 
section 4.1.1. of this document are relevant here. The nature 
of the organization and its industry will dictate the degree 
to which recommended practices may be relevant or even 
required. An organization in a highly regulated industry may 
need to continuously demonstrate compliance with one or 
more externally recommended frameworks to show due dili-
gence. An organization may feel compelled to demonstrate 
compliance to maintain a competitive advantage. Other 
organizations may not require demonstrable adherence to 
externally recommended practices. Auditor judgment will 
be important in completing this step. If the audit process 
has demonstrated good alignment between business realities, 
industry standards, the board’s expectations, and manage-
ment’s behaviors, a strict comparison with recommended 
practices may be unnecessary.

4.3.  Auditing Information  Security 
Governance – Analyzing

After confirming the alignment of the organization’s risk 
appetite, the internal auditor should begin the analysis phase  
— where all of the information is gathered together and 
tied via themes — so he or she can draw a conclusion about 
whether the program is effective. During this phase, one 
question the internal auditor must consider is: “How does my 
organization match up against the recommended practices 
the authors provide?”

4.3.1. Accountability
The internal auditor will need to analyze the data and 

determine whether the governance process creates and 
supports accountability. To obtain reasonable assurance 
that the ISG activity creates and supports accountability, 
the internal auditor needs to identify whether the evidence 
demonstrates the following:

•	 First,	 the	 organization’s	 risk	 appetite	 and	 executive	
management’s directives should have been effectively 
translated into policies, procedures, and standards. If 
policies do not align with the stated goals of the board 
and executive management, holding people account-
able for understanding and following these policies 
will not achieve the desired result. The internal 
auditor should note that this is a critical step in the 
analysis phase. If employees are consistently taking 
the wrong actions, this may result in a high level of 
conformity, but it will not yield effective long-term 
governance.

•	 Second,	upon	determining	that	management’s	direc-
tives have been effectively translated into policies, 
standards, and procedures, the internal auditor must 
determine whether accountability for significant 
processes is established and supported. Accountability 
can be established but not supported, which still 
results in an ineffective governance structure. This 
state is sometimes described as having accountability, 
but not authority, for an activity. An example of 
unsupported accountability would be declaring that 
the CISO will ensure that all systems receive security 
patches in a timely fashion. This statement estab-
lishes clear accountability. If, however, the CISO 
lacks enforcement capability, then the organiza-
tion has created accountability without authority. 
Alternatively, if the organization states that the 
CISO will work with system owners to ensure that 
all patches are applied within a certain timeframe 
and also entrusts the CISO with sufficient authority 
to shut down or logically isolate any nonconforming 
systems, then the internal auditor may be able to state 
and conclude that assignments of accountability and 
authority are sufficiently matched.



15

GTAG — Auditing Information Security Governance

on the audience, but it is necessary at all levels of 
the organization from the board of directors to end 
users, suppliers, and vendors. The internal auditor 
should be able to identify that some IS expectations 
are communicated at each level of the organization 
and to third parties that interact with the organi-
zation’s information resources. For executives, this 
communication may be a brief discussion. For IT 
administrators, the training programs may be very 
involved. For vendors and suppliers, expectations 
may be identified and communicated contractually.

•	 The	 ISG	 activity	 must	 have	 some	 associated	
reporting. The level of formality associated with this 
activity will vary depending on the size, needs, and 
complexity of the organization. Although the number 
of metrics will vary depending on the organization, 
this	reporting	likely	will	include	formal	metrics	(e.g.,	
KPIs).	This	 reporting	process	 also	 should	provide	 a	
mechanism for reporting on qualitative feedback. 
Key themes from a regulatory examination are an 
example of important qualitative feedback that does 
not conform to a simple mathematical formula like 
KPIs.

•	 The	 ISG	 activity	 also	 should	 demonstrate	 that	
security- and risk-related items are highlighted to a 
sufficient level of management to ensure effective 
responses. Significant items, such as suspected loss 
of	 trade	 secrets	 and	 exporting	 illegal	 software	 (e.g.,	
encryption	 algorithms),	 may	 immediately	 be	 esca-
lated to key executives while more benign items, such 
as personal use of an e-mail system, might be handled 
by line management. The governance process should 
demonstrate some overall reporting and tracking of 
these items to ensure that trends in IS can be detected 
and addressed early. This response process also may 
entail specific predefined responses to user activities. 
This may result in additional training, for example, 
when minor policy violations occur and disciplinary 
activity when major policy violations occur.

4.3.4. Efficiency
An important question that the internal auditor will face 
when analyzing any KPI is whether the reporting is sufficient 
to support ongoing gains in efficiency. Without sufficient 
reporting, the organization can never achieve ongoing 
process improvement. As an example, the organization may 
want to evaluate whether a two-hour, Web-based security 
course is as effective as a legacy four-hour classroom course. 
Without effective metrics, the organization probably will 
struggle to compare the relative effectiveness of the new 
course. With effective metrics, the organization may roll out 
the new course to selected sites or business units and compare 
security-related incidents among those receiving the legacy 
course and those receiving the new course. If the new course 

4.3.2. Design Effectiveness
Leveraging the information gathered in section 4.2., the 
internal auditor must now deliver an opinion on how effec-
tively the ISG activity has been designed. If the analysis in 
section 4.3.1. concluded that there was insufficient account-
ability or authority at one or more levels, it is unlikely that 
the governance process can sustain effective performance. 
The organization that is following an incomplete framework 
will deliver unpredictable results over time. While testing 
may indicate that the overall framework is still effective 
at the time of the actual evaluation, the internal auditor 
should highlight this situation for attention because a lack 
of sustainability represents a control deficiency in the activ-
ity’s design.

If there is sufficient accountability and authority, and the 
program reflects industry, board, and management expecta-
tions, the internal auditor likely will deliver an opinion that 
the ISG activity is effectively designed. The internal auditor 
may then proceed in assessing whether the activity is effec-
tively implemented.

4.3.3. Information Security Program Effectiveness
At this stage of the evaluation, internal auditors have 
enough information to determine whether there is an ISG 
activity designed to support the organization’s objectives 
and have identified whether sufficient accountability and 
authority have been assigned to enable the program. Even 
if all of these conditions hold, the program may still fail 
to achieve its stated objectives. The internal auditor must 
now	examine	the	evidence	(e.g.,	documentation,	organiza-
tion,	and	structure)	generated	by	the	ongoing	execution	of	
the ISG activity and decide — based on available evidence 
— how completely the deployed activity achieves its design 
potential. An effective ISG activity will show evidence of 
proper communication and training, maintenance of policies 
and standards, ongoing reporting of program results through 
metrics and qualitative comments, escalation of security- or 
risk-related events to a proper level of management, and 
appropriate responses when management’s directives are 
unintentionally or intentionally circumvented. Additional 
details for each of these items include:

•	 Policies	and	standards	must	be	maintained	to	remain	
effective and to appropriately reflect management’s 
intent. The internal auditor should find some 
evidence that policies and standards are periodi-
cally reviewed. Reviews should be documented and 
provide independent validations as needed. For 
example, standards on information asset classification 
should be reviewed by people with sufficient exper-
tise to confirm that the organization is updating its 
standards to reflect changing external requirements.

•	 Proper	 communication	 and	 training	 is	 necessary	 to	
effectively implement and maintain an ISG activity. 
This communication and training will vary depending 



16

GTAG — Auditing Information Security Governance

loss associated with a security event. Because these concerns 
may create operational, regulatory, or reputational damage 
to the organization, management can take comfort in 
knowing that proactive efforts have dramatically decreased 
the chance that a major loss will occur and long-term strate-
gies are likely to succeed without IS-related problems.

In any organization, a process must provide some benefit 
to the organization and the more value added, the better it 
enhances the organization. Are there value added benefits 
that could be obtained from the governance process? Can 
organizations improve on these benefits to obtain more 
value? Certainly, this is always possible. As previously 
mentioned, one possible improvement would be to measure 
the activity to see if it can be streamlined to deliver the same 
results. The example cited was replacing classroom training 
with streaming content to determine whether the end results 
are comparable. Another possible ongoing improvement is 
to use the organization’s security for competitive advantage. 
As previously noted, strong IS should yield reductions in 
the number and severity of security-related incidents. The 
organization should carefully consider whether this can be 
translated into competitive advantage. For example, if the 
organization is providing online transaction processing, 
does the ISG activity provide sufficient confidence that the 
organization can contractually commit to higher availability 
targets than its competitors? This could yield competitive 
differentiation in the marketplace. If the organization is 
transferring risk through insurance, can it use the demon-
strable outcomes of the ISG activities to negotiate lower 
insurance premiums?

Following the steps in this section, the internal auditor 
can begin to evaluate the effectiveness of the ISG activity.

4.3.7. Continuous Improvement
The design of the ISG activity should be reviewed periodi-
cally to verify that the organization’s needs continue to be 
met. The prior discussion has largely focused on the execu-
tion against the current design, but efforts must be made 
to keep the design relevant. As the risk environment and 
organization change, so too must its IS activity. The internal 
auditor should verify that the board and management review 
the risk appetite, risk tolerance, and policies and procedures 
at least once a year according to a set schedule or after a 
major	 change	 (e.g.,	 new	 regulations	 or	 key	 management	
changes)	to	the	organization.

Questions to ask:
1. Is there a formal schedule identified to review the 

ISG activity?
2. Is there a document that identifies who will conduct 

the review, how it will be conducted, and how results 
will be communicated and acted upon, if necessary?

3. Have reviews been conducted according to schedule? 
Are the previous meetings’ minutes formally retained 
and reviewed during subsequent meetings?

yields comparable results, the organization can easily switch 
to the less time-intensive, lower-cost option and be reason-
ably sure that its security posture has not been negatively 
impacted. Even without the support of metrics that enable 
the organization to optimize its ISG activity, the activity 
may still be effective. Throughout this process, the internal 
auditor also should consider efficiency. As noted previously, 
the process can be effective but not efficient. Some examples 
of this behavior would include:

•	 Excessive documentation of policies, standards, and 
procedures. If the audit activity finds a 15-page proce-
dure written about how to enroll in online security 
training courses, the organization has likely created 
too much documentation.

•	 Excessive sign-offs or approvals. If the organization 
requires CFO and CIO approval to enable a new 
user account for anything except the most sensitive 
systems, it has not improved security.

•	 Excessive escalation of security issues. If the CIO is 
notified each time that someone scans the perimeter 
firewall, security concerns are being inappropriately 
escalated.

4.3.5. Resource Levels
Given the understanding of the ISG activity, do the resources 
required align with the delivery of the service activity?

As with any other function, the ISG activity needs to be 
supported with adequate staffing. This GTAG previously 
discussed accountability and authority as critical enablers. 
Even with accountability and authority, it is possible to fail in 
delivering good governance because of insufficient personnel 
to ensure delivery. Because of the far-reaching nature of 
ISG, delivering good governance requires sustained support 
throughout the organization. As mentioned in section 4.1., 
governance may require support from a number of organiza-
tion groups such as legal and human resources. If resources 
from any of these groups are not available, this dramati-
cally impairs the long-term sustainability of ISG activities. 
Ensuring that proper staffing is maintained may require the 
person charged with managing ISG to periodically report to 
the board or other executive level management about the 
composition of the team, both in terms of key positions, 
the qualifications of the people in those positions, and the 
tenure of each person in a key position.

4.3.6. Value Added
What benefits are derived from the governance structure? If 
internal auditors have made it this far in the analysis and 
have confidence in the ISG activity, then they can assume 
that the organization will consistently codify the regulatory/
legal needs and executive management’s directives into 
actionable policies, standards, and procedures. Internal audi-
tors also can conclude that these results are generally applied 
and understood across the organization. The net benefit of 
these activities results from a low probability of unacceptable 



17

GTAG — Conclusion/Summary

5. Conclusion/Summary
The internal auditor can help an organization understand 
the risks and options to create an effective ISG activity. 
Executive and line management throughout the organiza-
tion must be held accountable for appropriately managing 
the risks associated with IS and ensuring that the tone at 
the top actively supports IS, as well as provides an important 
message for the entire organization to act appropriately and 
do the right things.

ISG provides the organization with a framework for making 
appropriate risk mitigation decisions and building the orga-
nization’s ability to protect and react to external and internal 
threats. The ISG activity enables the organization to contin-
uously build upon its security program through continuous 
feedback from the lowest line manager to the board.

The organization’s ISG activity should be designed to 
maintain and grow the organization’s security program. 
Effective and efficient ISG practices must include clearly 
defined roles and responsibilities, alignment of risk appetite 
with strategic IT objectives, effective communications and 
reporting, and maintaining accountability through value-
added monitoring systems.

 

4. If corrective actions were identified as required, 
were outcomes of the reviews acted upon in a timely 
manner?

5. If formal meetings are infrequent, are committed 
activities tracked and reported against between 
formal meetings? 



18

GTAG —  Appendix

all affected stakeholders doing so? Are those respon-
sible for delivering training doing so? Are employees 
given sufficient time and organizational support 
to complete required training courses? If specialist 
knowledge is required, is the organization hiring 
people with sufficient skills or purchasing expertise 
from external consultants?

6.4. Does the organization monitor the 
ongoing health of the information 
security governance activity?

Similar to any process supported by people, the process will 
drift away from its original goals and purpose over time. The 
process needs to be continuously monitored so that substan-
tial shifts can be addressed in a timely manner.

•	 Is	 there	 effective	 reporting	 for	 the	 ISG	 activity?	
Is the reporting and feedback mechanism formal 
and highly structured or something less structured? 
Evaluate whether the level of formality is appropriate 
to the organization’s size, complexity, and business 
activities.

•	 Are	 there	 defined,	 tracked,	 and	 reported	 metrics	
that can measure ISG? Are thresholds defined that 
identify when corrective action should be taken in 
response to changes in these metrics?

•	 Are	people	held	accountable	for	performing	activities	
that support governance? If training is not delivered 
in a timely fashion, does the organization take correc-
tive action in response to this? If policies, standards, 
and procedures are not renewed in a timely manner, 
what is the organization’s response?

6.5. Has the organization taken steps to 
improve its governance over time?

•	 Does	it	measure	itself	against	external	benchmarks?
•	 Does	 it	 use	 metrics	 data	 to	 drive	 sustained	

improvements?
•	 Does	 it	 look	 for	 inefficiencies	 in	 control	 and	 take	

action to streamline controls?
 

6. Appendix – Sample   
 Audit Questions/Topics

6.1. Is the organization’s risk appetite 
well defined and understood?

Every organization has a risk appetite whether defined or 
undefined. Sustainable performance requires a defined risk 
appetite that reflects the input of all key stakeholders and 
the industry, as well as supports regulatory expectations.

•	 Discuss	risk	and	risk	appetite	with	the	board,	execu-
tive management, and middle management. Is it 
consistently defined and understood at all levels? Is 
common terminology used to discuss risk?

•	 Is	 there	 evidence	 that	 risk	 is	 a	 component	 when	
making strategic decisions? Is risk included in discus-
sions of new business ventures, strategic shifts in 
priorities, changes in the regulatory environment, 
and in planning and managing key initiatives?

6.2. Is there a defined, effective information 
security governance process?

An effective ISG activity builds upon risk management 
activities. It should support the evaluation of risk and control 
activities designed to mitigate or accept risk. It also should 
adapt to strategic shifts in business and regulatory climates.

•	 Discuss	 the	 risk	 management	 process	 with	 appro-
priate levels of management.

•	 Evaluate	 internally	 developed	 and	 deployed	 risk	
management frameworks against available industry 
guidance if it exists. Identify whether major gaps 
exist.

•	 Document	recent	significant	changes	in	business	and	
regulatory environments and discuss with appropriate 
levels of management to identify whether these are 
changed risk evaluations or ongoing management 
activities.

6.3. Is there effective organizational 
support for the information 
security governance activity?

Once the organization has defined and understood its risk 
appetite and identified common methods for defining and 
measuring risk, it still must provide sufficient training to 
encourage appropriate ongoing effectiveness.

•	 Identify	whether	roles	and	responsibilities	are	prop-
erly defined for supporting ISG. Review deliverables 
for key participants in the governance activity to 
ensure that supporting activities are occurring. Are 
those responsible for updating policies, standards, 
and procedures doing so? Are those responsible for 
monitoring the risk environment communicating to 



19

GTAG — References

•	 Information Security Governance: Guidance for 
Information Security Managers, IT Governance 
Institute, Rolling Meadows, Ill., USA, 2008.

•	 Information Security Oversight: A 2007 Survey Report, 
National	 Association	 of	 Corporate	 Directors	 and	
KPMG’s Audit Committee Institute.

•	 Information Security Practical Guidance on How 
to Prepare for Successful Audits, IT Compliance 
Institute, 2006. www.t2pa.com/analysis-a-advice/
library/179-it-audit-check-list-information-security

•	 Information Security Standards	(ISO/IEC	27000:2009),	
International Organization for Standardization, 
2009.

•	 Information Technology — Security Techniques — Key 
Management, Australian Standard 11770.1—2003, 
Standards Australia International, Sydney, Australia, 
2003.

•	 Internal Control — Integrated Framework, Committee 
of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway 
Commission, 1992.

•	 The	International	Professional	Practices	Framework,	
The Institute of Internal Auditors, Altamonte 
Springs, Fla., USA, 2009.

•	 An Introduction to Computer Security: The NIST 
Handbook	 (Special	 Publication	 800-12),	 Chapter	
2:	 Elements	 of	 Computer	 Security,	 The	 National	
Institutes	 of	 Standards	 and	 Technology	 (NIST),	
Gaithersburg, Md., USA, 1995.

•	 The	 IT	 Service	Management	 Forum.	 www.itSMFi.
org

•	 Performance Measurement Guide for Information 
Security	 (Special	 Publication	 800-55	 Revision	 1),	
National	 Institutes	 of	 Standards	 and	 Technology	
(NIST),	Gaithersburg,	Md.,	USA,	2008.

•	 Program Review for Information Security Management 
Assistance	 (PRISMA),	 National	 Institutes	 of	
Standards	 and	 Technology	 (NIST),	 Gaithersburg,	
Md., USA, 2007.

•	 The Standards of Good Practice for Information Security, 
Information Security Forum, 2007.

7. References
•	 2007 Global State of Information Security Study, 

PricewaterhouseCoopers.

•	 Bihari,	 Endre.	 Information	 Security	 Definitions.	
www.perfres.net

•	 Building an Information Technology Security Awareness 
and Training Program	 (Special	 Publication	 800-50),	
National	 Institutes	 of	 Standards	 and	 Technology	
(NIST),	Gaithersburg,	Md.,	USA,	2003.

•	 Corporate Governance of Information Technology 
(ISO/IEC	 38500:2008),	 International	 Organization	
for Standardization, 2008.

•	 Enterprise Risk Management — Integrated Framework, 
Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the 
Treadway Commission, 2004.

•	 Governing for Enterprise Security (GES) Implementation 
Guide, Software Engineering Institute, 2007.

•	 GTAG-1: Information Technology Controls, The 
Institute of Internal Auditors, Altamonte Springs, 
Fla., USA, 2005.

•	 GTAG-9: Identity and Access Management, The 
Institute of Internal Auditors, Altamonte Springs, 
Fla., USA, 2007.

•	 GTAG-11: Developing the IT Audit Plan, The Institute 
of Internal Auditors, Altamonte Springs, Fla., USA, 
2008.

•	 GTAG-12: Auditing IT Projects, The Institute of 
Internal Auditors, Altamonte Springs, Fla., USA, 
2009.

•	 Guide to Test, Training, and Exercise Programs for IT 
Plans and Capabilities	 (Special	 Publication	 800-84),	
National	 Institutes	 of	 Standards	 and	 Technology	
(NIST),	Gaithersburg,	Md.,	USA,	2006.

•	 Guide	to	the	Assessment	of	IT	Risk	(GAIT)	Series,	
The Institute of Internal Auditors, Altamonte 
Springs, Fla., USA.

•	 Information Security Governance: Guidance for Boards 
of Directors and Executive Management, 2nd Edition, 
IT Governance Institute, Rolling Meadows, Ill., 
USA, 2006.



20

GTAG —  Authors and Reviewers

8. Authors and Reviewers

Authors:
•	 Paul	Love,	CISSP,	CISA
•	 James	Reinhard,	CIA,	CISA
•	 A.J.	Schwab,	CISA,
•	 George	Spafford,	CISA

Reviewers:
The IIA thanks the following individuals and groups who 
provided valuable comments to this guide:

•	 AICPA	 –	 American	 Institute	 of	 Certified	 Public	
Accountants 

•	 Douglas	J.	Anderson,	CIA
•	 David	F.	Bentley
•	 Lily	Bi,	CIA,	CGEIT,	CISA
•	 Lawrence	P.	Brown,	CIA,	CISA	
•	 Jeanot	de	Boer	
•	 Lisa	K.	Hirtzinger,	CIA,	CCSA
•	 Steven	Hunt,	CIA,	CISA,	CGEIT	
•	 The	Institute	of	Internal	Auditors	–	South	Africa
•	 The	Institute	of	Internal	Auditors	–	UK	&	Ireland
•	 Rune	Johannessen,	CIA,	CCSA,	CISA	
•	 David	S.	Lione,	CISA
•	 Steve	Mar,	CFSA
•	 Cesar	L.	Martinez,	CIA,	CGAP
•	 Professional	Practices	Advisory	Council:

 o Advanced Technology Committee
 o Board of Regents
 o Committee on Quality
 o Ethics Committee
 o Internal Audit Standards Board
 o Professional Issues Committee

•	 Sajay	Rai
•	 R.	Vittal	Raj,	CIA
•	 Ross	A.	Richards
•	 Stig	J.	Sunde,	CIA,	CGAP
•	 Dan	Swanson,	CIA,	CISA,	CISSP
•	 Johannes	Tekle,	CIA,	CFSA
•	 Archie	R.	Thomas,	CIA	
•	 David	Williams,	CISA	
•	 Tom	Wilson,	MIIA
•	 Karine	F.	Wegrzynowicz,	CIA,	CISA	



21

Global Technology Audit Guide (GTAG)

21

Written in straightforward business language to address timely issues related to IT management, control, and security,  
the GTAG series serves as a ready resource for CAEs on different technology-associated risks and recommended practices. 

Auditing user-developed ApplicAtions (udAs) addresses risks associated with UDAs, provides direction 
on how to scope an internal audit of UDAs, and includes sample internal audit programs. Because 
management relies on UDAs, they should be a consideration to incorporate into the audit plan.  

FrAud prevention And detection in An AutomAted World addresses IT-related fraud risks and risk 
assessments and how the use of technology can help internal auditors and other key stakeholders 
within the organization address fraud and fraud risks.

Auditing it projects provides an overview of techniques for effectively engaging with project teams 
and management to assess the risks related to IT projects.

developing the it Audit plAn provides step-by-step guidance on how to develop an IT audit plan from 
understanding the business, defining the IT audit universe, and performing a risk assessment to formal-
izing the IT audit plan.

Business continuity mAnAgement	defines	business	continuity	management	(BCM),	discusses	business	risk,	
and includes a detailed discussion of BCM program requirements.

identity And Access mAnAgement covers key concepts surrounding identity and access management 
(IAM),	 risks	 associated	with	 IAM	process,	 detailed	 guidance	 on	 how	 to	 audit	 IAM	processes,	 and	 a	
sample checklist for auditors.

Auditing ApplicAtion controls addresses the concept of application control and its relationship with 
general controls, as well as how to scope a risk-based application control review.



22

Global Technology Audit Guide (GTAG)

inFormAtion technology outsourcing discusses how to choose the right IT outsourcing vendor and key 
outsourcing control considerations from the client’s and service provider’s operation.

mAnAging And Auditing it vulnerABilities discusses, among other topics, the vulnerability management life 
cycle, the scope of a vulnerability management audit, and metrics to measure vulnerability management 
practices.

mAnAging And Auditing privAcy risks discusses global privacy principles and frameworks, privacy 
risk models and controls, the role of internal auditors, top 10 privacy questions to ask during the 
course of the audit, and more.

mAnAgement oF it Auditing discusses IT-related risks and defines the IT audit universe, as well as 
how to execute and manage the IT audit process.

continuous Auditing addresses the role of continuous auditing in today’s internal audit environ-
ment; the relationship of continuous auditing, continuous monitoring, and continuous assurance; 
and the application and implementation of continuous auditing.

chAnge And pAtch mAnAgement controls describes sources of change and their likely impact on 
business objectives, as well as how change and patch management controls help manage IT risks 
and costs and what works and doesn’t work in practice.

inFormAtion technology controls topics discusses IT control concepts, the importance of IT 
controls, the organizational roles and responsibilities for ensuring effective IT controls, and risk 
analysis and monitoring techniques.



Better together? 
Absolutely.  When governance, risk management, and compliance are interlocked 
with information and technology in your organization, it allows you to improve 
performance.  It creates information-rich and technology-driven business 
processes across the organization to reveal the full picture.
Our team of professionals can help you put the pieces together. We tap into our 
deep experience in IT risk management, regulatory compliance, business process 
and application controls, information security, privacy and technology enablement 
to help you manage your information and technology risk and control costs to 
deliver business value ef ciently and securely. Give us a call.

What’s next?
ey.com

©
20

10
 E

RN
ST

 &
 Y

O
U

N
G 

LL
P

Er
ns

t &
 Y

ou
ng

 re
fe

rs
 to

 th
e 

gl
ob

al
 o

rg
an

iz
at

io
n 

of
 m

em
be

r 
rm

s 
of

 E
rn

st
 &

 Y
ou

ng
 G

lo
ba

l L
im

ite
d,

 
ea

ch
 o

f w
hi

ch
 is

 a
 s

ep
ar

at
e 

le
ga

l e
nt

ity
. E

rn
st

 &
 Y

ou
ng

 L
LP

 is
 a

 c
lie

nt
-s

er
vi

ng
 m

em
be

r 
 r

m
 lo

ca
te

d 
in

 th
e 

U
S.



Order Number: 1073 
ISBN: 978-0-89413-687-0

Member Price: $25.00
Nonmember Price: $30.00

www.theiia.org

Information Security Governance
Information is a significant component of most organizations’ competitive strategy either by the direct 
collection, management, and interpretation of business information or the retention of information for 
day-to-day business processing. Some of the more obvious results of IS failures include reputational damage, 
placing the organization at a competitive disadvantage, and contractual noncompliance. These impacts 
should not be underestimated.

This Global Technology Audit Guide (GTAG) will provide a thought process to assist the chief audit 
executive (CAE) in incorporating an audit of information security governance (ISG) into the audit plan, 
focusing on whether the organization’s ISG activity delivers the correct behaviors, practices, and execution  
of IS. 

This GTAG will assist efforts to:

1. Define ISG.

2. Help internal auditors understand the right questions to ask and know what documentation is required.

3. Describe the internal audit activity’s (IAA) role in ISG.

We’d like your feedback! Visit the GTAG page under www.theiia.org/gtags  to rate it and submit your comments.


	GTAG 15-Cover-FNL-Lo
	GTAG 15-Text-FNL-Lo

