















































15. Cyberspace and Governance - Working Paper 65


www.ssoar.info

Cyberspace and governance - a primer
Klimburg, Alexander; Mirtl, Philipp

Veröffentlichungsversion / Published Version
Arbeitspapier / working paper

Zur Verfügung gestellt in Kooperation mit / provided in cooperation with:
SSG Sozialwissenschaften, USB Köln

Empfohlene Zitierung / Suggested Citation:
Klimburg, Alexander ; Mirtl, Philipp ; Österreichisches Institut für Internationale Politik (oiip) (Ed.): Cyberspace and
governance - a primer. Wien, 2012 (Working Paper / Österreichisches Institut für Internationale Politik 65). URN: http://
nbn-resolving.de/urn:nbn:de:0168-ssoar-435603

Nutzungsbedingungen:
Dieser Text wird unter einer Deposit-Lizenz (Keine
Weiterverbreitung - keine Bearbeitung) zur Verfügung gestellt.
Gewährt wird ein nicht exklusives, nicht übertragbares,
persönliches und beschränktes Recht auf Nutzung dieses
Dokuments. Dieses Dokument ist ausschließlich für
den persönlichen, nicht-kommerziellen Gebrauch bestimmt.
Auf sämtlichen Kopien dieses Dokuments müssen alle
Urheberrechtshinweise und sonstigen Hinweise auf gesetzlichen
Schutz beibehalten werden. Sie dürfen dieses Dokument
nicht in irgendeiner Weise abändern, noch dürfen Sie
dieses Dokument für öffentliche oder kommerzielle Zwecke
vervielfältigen, öffentlich ausstellen, aufführen, vertreiben oder
anderweitig nutzen.
Mit der Verwendung dieses Dokuments erkennen Sie die
Nutzungsbedingungen an.

Terms of use:
This document is made available under Deposit Licence (No
Redistribution - no modifications). We grant a non-exclusive, non-
transferable, individual and limited right to using this document.
This document is solely intended for your personal, non-
commercial use. All of the copies of this documents must retain
all copyright information and other information regarding legal
protection. You are not allowed to alter this document in any
way, to copy it for public or commercial purposes, to exhibit the
document in public, to perform, distribute or otherwise use the
document in public.
By using this particular document, you accept the above-stated
conditions of use.

http://www.ssoar.info
http://nbn-resolving.de/urn:nbn:de:0168-ssoar-435603
http://nbn-resolving.de/urn:nbn:de:0168-ssoar-435603


* This is the revised version of an oiip Special Issue first published September 2011. 

 

 

 

 

 

Cyberspace and Governance—A Primer* 

 

 

Alexander Klimburg 
Philipp Mirtl 
 
 
Working Paper 65 / September 2012  



Alexander Klimburg and Philipp Mirtl 

WP 65: Cyberspace and Governance—A Primer 

2 

Contents 
 

1. Abstract (English) ................................................................................................ 3 

2. Abstract (Deutsch) ............................................................................................... 3 

3. Grasping the Difference ....................................................................................... 4 

3.1. The Net ................................................................................................................................... 4 

3.2. The Web ................................................................................................................................. 7 

3.3. Cyberspace—A Four Layer Model ..................................................................................... 9 

4. The Five Mandates of National Cybersecurity ................................................. 15 

5. Cybersecurity in Internet Governance.............................................................. 20 

5.1. Technical Internet Governance: Ad Hoc ......................................................................... 23 

5.2. Policy Internet Governance: Institutionalized ................................................................. 24 

6. References .......................................................................................................... 27 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

About the Authors: 

Alexander Klimburg is Fellow and Senior Adviser at the oiip. 

Philipp Mirtl is Fellow and Adviser at the oiip.  



Alexander Klimburg and Philipp Mirtl 

WP 65: Cyberspace and Governance—A Primer 

3 

 
1. Abstract (English) 

This working paper has a threefold purpose: first, it proposes a better understanding 

of the difference between the Internet (interconnecting computers) and the World 

Wide Web (managing information). Against this background, a four-layer model of 

cyberspace is presented including a physical, logical, informational, and social layer. 

Second, the paper splits the national cybersecurity debate in five distinct subject are-

as, or mandates. These include Military Cyberactivities, Counter-Cybercrime, Intelli-

gence and Counter-Intelligence, Critical Infrastructure Protection and National Crisis 

Management, and Cyberdiplomacy and Internet Governance, each of which is typi-

cally covered by a distinct government department. Third, as one of the most under-

stated and least understood mandates on this list, Internet Governance is described 

at more length in the final section. 

 

2. Abstract (Deutsch) 

Die Zielsetzung dieses Arbeitspapiers gliedert sich in drei Kernpunkte: Erstens wird 

versucht, den Unterschied zwischen dem Internet (Vernetzung von Computern) und 

dem World Wide Web (Informationsverwaltung) herauszuarbeiten. Vor diesem Hin-

tergrund soll der Cyberspace als ein Vierschichtenmodell aufgespannt werden, das 

eine physische, logische, informationelle und soziale Schicht beinhaltet. Zweitens teilt 

dieses Papier die nationale Debatte zur Cybersicherheit in fünf unterschiedliche 

Themenbereiche, oder auch Mandate. Diese umfassen Militärische Cyberaktivitäten; 

Bekämpfung von Cyberkriminalität; Nachrichtendienstliche Aktivitäten; Schutz Kriti-

scher Infrastrukturen und Nationales Krisenmanagement; sowie Cyberdiplomatie und 

Internet Governance. Im Allgemeinen kann jedes dieser fünf Mandate von unter-

schiedlichen Ministerien abgedeckt werden. Drittens soll in einem abschließenden 

Teil Internet Governance, als eines der am wenigsten beachteten Mandate in diesem 

Zusammenhang, ausführlicher betrachtet werden. 



Alexander Klimburg and Philipp Mirtl 

WP 65: Cyberspace and Governance—A Primer 

4 

3. Grasping the Difference 

Cyberspace is the “world behind your screen.”1 However, when computers started 

talking to each other, this world started to expand. Historically, this process had al-

ready begun in 1969, when the Universities of California (UCLA) and Stanford 

(SRI)—the first two nodes of what would later come to be known as the Internet, or 

the Net—exchanged their first host-to-host message.2 

 

3.1. The Net 

The Internet has played a crucial role for the expansion of cyberspace. By using a 

combination of different data transmission mechanisms, such as the Transmission 

Control Protocol (TCP) and the Internet Protocol (IP) as the two most important pro-

tocols within the Internet Protocol Suite, an increasing number of computer users 

have been empowered by receiving unprecedented access to information. 

Although the Internet is the most recent technology in a long series of communication 

technologies (such as telephone, teleprinters, or the radio), today internet technology 

is nearly all-encompassing. This is especially due to the fact that Information and 

Telecommunications Technology (ICT) is increasingly being dominated by the Inter-

net Protocol (IP) as the main technical standard for communication between devic-

es.3 This can be attributed in a large part to bottom-up non-governmental stakehold-

ers, such as the members of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), who have 

developed many key software protocols and technical fixes that the Internet depends 

upon today.4 This is why the development of internet standards can best be de-

scribed as a self-regulatory process.5 

                                                           
1 John Naughton, A Brief History of the Future. The Origins of the Internet  (London: Phoenix, 1999). 
311. 
2 See, for instance, Barry M. Leiner et al., “A Brief History of the Internet,” ISOC, 
http://www.internetsociety.org/internet/internet-51/history-internet/brief-history-internet. 
3 Jovan Kurbalija, An Introduction to Internet Governance, (Genève: DiploFoundation, 2010), 
http://archive1.diplomacy.edu/poolbin.asp?IDPool=1060. 6. 
4 See, for instance, Paulina Borsook, “How Anarchy Works: On location with the masters of the 
metaverse, the Internet Engineering Task Force,” Wired, October 1995. 
5 OECD, “Working Party on Telecommunication and Information Services Policies. Internet 
Infrastructure Indicators (DSTI/ICCP/TISP(98)7/FINAL),” (Paris 1998). 



Alexander Klimburg and Philipp Mirtl 

WP 65: Cyberspace and Governance—A Primer 

5 

Measured by regular surveys,6 the number of global Internet users (defined as per-

sons who have available access to an Internet connection point,7 and the basic 

knowledge required to use web technology8) grew from 16 million in 1995 to more 

than 2.1 billion in 2011.9 This is an astounding increase of around 13,000%. Howev-

er, one should keep in mind that in 2011 more than ¾ of the world’s Internet users 

came from Asia (44%), Europe (22.7%), and North America (13%).10 

In general, an internetwork, or simply internet (with a lowercase “i”), evolves from in-

terconnecting computer networks. These generic networks of networks can vary in 

size. The interconnection of two Local Area Networks (LANs), for instance, forms a 

smaller internet than two interconnected Wide Area Networks (WANs).11 The Internet 

(with an uppercase “I”), however, is the unique “global network of computer net-

works.”12  

Internet capitalization conventions should not be overlooked in political discourse. For 

instance, when in 2006 the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) changed its 

policy in officially spelling out “internet” (with a lowercase “i”), US ambassador David 

A. Clark reacted disconcertedly, not knowing whether this would be of any concern 

for US interests.13 In contrast, The Economist changed its editorial policy in 2003, 

arguing that the “internet” was no longer one particular network but has transformed 

to a generic technology comparable to the telephone or the radio.14 

The Internet is essentially a collection of networks, and devices on these networks, 

which agree to communicate with each other. This communication depends on the 

                                                           
6 See, for instance, UNSTATS, “UN Millennium Development Goals Indicators. The official United 
Nations site for the MDG Indicators,”  
http://unstats.un.org/unsd/mdg/Metadata.aspx?IndicatorId=0&SeriesId=608. 
7 Internet connection points are usually provided by Internet service providers (ISPs) against payment. 
8 See Internet World Stats, “Surfing and Site Guide,”  http://www.internetworldstats.com/surfing.htm#1. 
9 See Internet World Stats, “Internet Growth Statistics,”  
http://www.internetworldstats.com/emarketing.htm. 
10 See Internet World Stats, “Internet Users in the World. Distribution by World Region,”  
http://www.internetworldstats.com/stats.htm; NewScientist, “Exploring the exploding Internet,”  
http://www.newscientist.com/gallery/mg20227061900-exploring-the-exploding-internet/5. 
11 A LAN usually connects computers and devices within relatively limited areas (such as office build-
ings, universities or power plants), while a WAN covers a broader terrain (such as a city, region or 
even a state). Today, for instance, Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition systems (SCADA) in-
creasingly monitor and control industrial production or infrastructure over IP-based LAN-WAN connec-
tions. 
12 Naughton, A Brief History of the Future. The Origins of the Internet: 314. 
13 Victoria Shannon, “What’s in an ‘i’? Internet governance,” New York Times, 3 December 2006. 
14 See Kurbalija, An Introduction to Internet Governance. 6. 



Alexander Klimburg and Philipp Mirtl 

WP 65: Cyberspace and Governance—A Primer 

6 

so-called Internet Protocol (IP).15 Internet protocol numbers represent the most basic 

identifier on the Internet, which is why they are also referred to as an IP address. 

Every device connected to the Internet has its own IP address; if it does not have an 

IP address, it is not connected to the Internet. 

An IP address is a complex string of values used to identify the physical location of a 

computer connected to the Internet (e.g., PCs, servers, smartphones). In the early 

1980s, a total number of 4.3 billion (4.3x10^9) IP addresses (referred to as IPv4)16 

were considered to be enough for the foreseeable future.17 However, the explosive 

demand for IP address blocks over the last thirty years, as well as the vision of an 

Internet of Things (IoT), in which everyday objects (such as home appliances or 

clothing) are made accessible over the Internet, have proven the original quantity of 

IP addresses allotted was, in fact, inadequate. 

In the 1990s, therefore, IP version 6 (referred to as IPv6)18 was developed. IPv6 

would provide enough address space for around 340 undecillion (a trillion, trillion, 

trillion, or 3.4x10^38) Internet connection points. With an estimated world population 

of 6.8 billion living human beings,19 the potential number of IPv6 addresses would 

enable each individual to connect around 1.2 billion devices to the Net; or, to eluci-

date these numbers in a more comprehensible analogy, “if all the IPv4 addresses 

could fit within a Blackberry, it would take something the size of Earth to contain 

IPv6.”20 

IPv4 reached its “depletion date” in the spring-summer of 2011,21 which made the 

shift to IPv6 a necessity. With IP addresses, not a restricted commodity anymore, this 

                                                           
15 Sometimes also written as TCP/IP. 
16 For a better overview, IPv4 addresses are usually not displayed in a long line of zeros and ones, but 
in four groups of decimal numbers, separated by dots and ranging from 0 to 255 (e.g., 208.80.152.2). 
17 See, for instance, ICANN, “To 4,294,967,296 and Beyond – Under 10% of IPv4 Space Remains: 
Adoption of IPv6 Is Essential,”  http://www.icann.org/en/announcements/announcement-29jan10-
en.htm. 
18 Similar to IPv4 addresses, IPv6 addresses are usually not written in long lines of zeros and ones, 
but in eight groups of four-digit, case insensitive hexadecimal values (0-9 and A-F/a-f), separated by 
colons (e.g., 21DA:00D3:0000:2F3B:02AA:00FF:FE28:9C5A). 
19 World Bank, “World Development Indicators 2011,”  
http://databank.worldbank.org/ddp/home.do?Step=12&id=4&CNO=2.  
20 ICANN, “IPv6 Factsheet,”  http://www.icann.org/en/announcements/announcement-26oct07.htm. 3. 
21 There are different dates depending on what regions of the world “exhausted” their stock of IPv4 
addresses. Indeed, the United States government is said to hold a very large amount of unassigned 
IPv4 addresses “in reserve”, so in some cases it can be said there has not yet been a true exhaustion 
of all IPv4 addresses. 



Alexander Klimburg and Philipp Mirtl 

WP 65: Cyberspace and Governance—A Primer 

7 

will allow the true IoT to occur, meaning literally all of human possessions (now, and 

for the foreseeable future) could potentially be “tagged” and made accessible over 

the Internet. The new Internet is therefore just beginning. 

 

3.2. The Web 

As one of the most important applications on the Net, the World Wide Web played a 

crucial role in the expansion of cyberspace. It was developed between 1989 and 

1990 by British software engineer Tim Berners-Lee while working at the European 

Centre for Nuclear Research (CERN). What initially started as a project to aid CERN 

physicists navigate a wealth of information was eventually released to the wider pub-

lic in 1991.22 However, the Web only had its breakthrough in 1993, when Mosaic—

the first major graphics supporting browser—entered the market.23 

In order to guarantee both a uniform language in which information could be present-

ed on websites, and a functioning device by which this information could be trans-

ferred and identified safely, Berners-Lee had to invent the Hypertext Markup Lan-

guage (HTML), as well as the Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP), and the Uniform 

Resource Locator (URL). Today, the standards for the Web are developed by a non-

governmental World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) established in 1994. 

In August 2011, there were more than 463 million websites (including subpages) with 

domain names and content on the Net.24 Compared to just 18,000 in August 1995,25 

this is a total increase of more than 2.5 million percent over the last 16 years. How-

ever, a significant share of this increase was only generated over the last two 

years.26 

As regards web server software, since May 1996, the open-source Apache HTTP 

Server software, developed by an open community under the auspices of the non-

profit Apache Software Foundation, has been the most popular HTTP server software 

                                                           
22 CERN, “The website of the world’s first-ever web server,”  http://info.cern.ch/. 
23 W3C, “A Little History of the World Wide Web. From 1945-1995,”  http://www.w3.org/History.html. 
24 Netcraft, “August 2011 Web Server Survey,”  http://news.netcraft.com/archives/2011/08/05/august-
2011-web-server-survey-3.html.   
25 Marsha Walton, “Web reaches new milestone: 100 million sites,” CNN.com, 1 November 2006. 
26 Netcraft, “August 2011 Web Server Survey”.   



Alexander Klimburg and Philipp Mirtl 

WP 65: Cyberspace and Governance—A Primer 

8 

in use. As of August 2011 Apache was estimated to serve 65.18% of all websites, 

followed by Microsoft Internet Information Services (IIS) with 15.86%, the Russian 

nginx with 7.67%, and Google Web Server with 3.68%.27 

The Web and the Net have always been inseparable. This often leads to the miscon-

ception that these two terms can be used interchangeably. However, the Web is just 

one of many different applications “on” the Net. The Net’s structure can be visualized 

by looking at the layered network architecture model called the Internet Protocol 

Suite.28 Here, for instance, the Internet Protocol (IP) lies on the Internet Layer, the 

Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) on the overlying Transport Layer, and the Hy-

pertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) on the top, which is called Application Layer. A 

similar organization can be observed in the Open Systems Interconnection Model 

(also referred to as the OSI model).29 All this means Web services can only be used 

properly if the underlying services (e.g., TCP/IP) work correctly. 

In this context, the Net’s overall idea is to interconnect computers in a global network 

of computer networks, while, building upon this interconnection, the Web’s essential 

aim is to manage information in a global Web of human-readable documents that can 

be defined as “content supplied in response to a request.”30 

This emphasize on content (or information) becomes obvious when looking at differ-

ent definitions for the Web. For instance, on the world’s first-ever website Berners-

Lee characterized the Web as “a wide-area hypermedia information retrieval initiative 

aiming to give universal access to a large universe of documents.”31 Elsewhere, the 

Web was also referred to as a “hypermedia system linking text, graphics, sound and 

video on computers distributed all over the world.”32 

 

                                                           
27 Ibid. 
28 IETF RFC 1122, “Requirements for Internet Hosts – Communication Layers,” October 1989, 
http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc1122. 
29 ISO/IEC 7498-1:1994, “Information technology – Open Systems Interconnection – Basic Reference 
Model: The Basic Model.” 
30 W3C, “W3C Glossary/Dictionary,”  http://www.w3.org/2003/glossary/alpha/D/80. 
31 W3C, “World Wide Web,”  http://www.w3.org/History/19921103-
hypertext/hypertext/WWW/TheProject.html. 
32 Naughton, A Brief History of the Future. The Origins of the Internet: 319. 



Alexander Klimburg and Philipp Mirtl 

WP 65: Cyberspace and Governance—A Primer 

9 

3.3. Cyberspace—A Four Layer Model 

In the introduction to this section, cyberspace has been referred to as the world be-

hind your screen. However, since the 1960s, this world’s horizons have expanded 

considerably. This is due, in no small part, to internet technologies developed by a 

self-regulated, non-governmental community. 

While differentiating the Internet (interconnecting computers) from the World Wide 

Web (managing information), the aim of the previous two subsections was to provide 

a better understanding of their contribution to the expansion of cyberspace. The aim 

of this section, however, is to define cyberspace as a somewhat wider framework, in 

which the Net plays an essential, albeit not exclusive, role. 

Over the last years, the term cyberspace has gained considerable attention. Science 

fiction author William Gibson is credited with first mentioning it in his short story Burn-

ing Chrome (1982).33 Two years later, in his famous 1984 cyberpunk novel called 

Neuromancer, the author described Cyberspace as a “consensual hallucination.”34 

Years later Gibson labeled the term an “effective buzzword” that seemed “evocative 

and essentially meaningless” when it first emerged on his pages.35 However, today 

cyberspace is not only popular among different strands of cyberpunks or computer 

enthusiasts. Moreover, it has made its way into a variety of disciplines of which politi-

cal science is just one. 

In contrast to land, sea, air and space, cyberspace is a human construct with compo-

nents that can change over time. Today, a wide variety of distinct definitions of cy-

berspace have been proposed.36 One of which was first used in the aftermath of 

9/11, when the 2003 US National Strategy to Secure Cyberspace described cyber-

space as a national “nervous system” which controls the country’s critical infrastruc-

ture. While highlighting the role of public-private engagement, the strategy stated: 

                                                           
33 William Gibson, “Burning Chrome [1982],” in Burning Chrome (New York: HarperCollins Publishers 
Inc., 2003). 
34 William Gibson, Neuromancer  (New York: Ace Books, 2000 [1984]). 67. 
35 Scott Thill, “March 17, 1948: William Gibson, Father of Cyberspace,” Wired, 17 March 2009. 
36 For a first overview see Daniel T. Kuehl, “From Cyberspace to Cyberpower: Defining the Problem,” 
in Cyberpower and National Security, ed. Franklin Kramer et al. (Washington, DC: National Defense 
UP, 2009), 26-7. 



Alexander Klimburg and Philipp Mirtl 

WP 65: Cyberspace and Governance—A Primer 

10 

“Cyberspace is composed of hundreds of thousands of interconnected com-

puters, servers, routers, switches, and fiber optic cables that allow our critical 

infrastructures to work. Thus, the healthy functioning of cyberspace is essen-

tial to our economy and our national security.”37 

Five years later, in 2008, a similar definition was put forward in US President George 

W. Bush’s National Security Presidential Directive 54, also known as Homeland Se-

curity Presidential Directive 23 (NSPD-54/HSPD-23).38 This document established 

the Comprehensive National Cybersecurity Initiative (CNCI),39 a partially classified 

USD 17 billion program designed to protect Federal Government systems against 

intrusion attempts.40 In this context, the directive defines cyberspace as 

“the interdependent network of information technology infrastructures, and in-

cludes the Internet, telecommunications networks, computer systems, and 

embedded processors and controllers in critical industries. Common usage of 

the term also refers to the virtual environment of information and interactions 

between people.”41 

Under the Obama administration, this definition has been adopted by the 2009 60-

Day Cyberspace Policy Review.42 

Nonetheless, there is still no standard, universally accepted definition for cyberspace, 

and for this reason, it is useful to think about ways how to approach the concept 

comprehensively. One way to do so is to conceptualize cyberspace in terms of multi-

ple interdependent layers of activities. There are varied conceptualizations of the dif-

ferent numbers and names of layers present in current academic discourse.43 How-

                                                           
37 White House, “The National Strategy to Secure Cyberspace,” (Washington, DC: White House, 
2003). 
38 National Security Presidential Directive 54: Cyber Security and Monitoring (NSPD-54) / Homeland 
Security Presidential Directive 23: Cyber Security and Monitoring (HSPD-23). 
39 White House, “The Comprehensive National Cybersecurity Initiative,” (Washington, DC: White 
House, 2008).  
40 Victoria Samson, “The Murky Waters of the White House’s Cybersecurity Plan,” Center for Defense 
Information, 23 July 2008. 
41 Public Safety and Homeland Security Bureau, “Tech Topic 20: Cyber Security and 
Communications,” FCC, http://transition.fcc.gov/pshs/techtopics/techtopics20.html. 
 
42 White House, “Cyberspace Policy Review. Assuring a Trusted and Resilient Information and 
Communications Infrastructure,” (Washington, DC: White House, 2009). 
43 See, for instance, Martin C. Libicki, Conquest in Cyberspace. National Security and Information 
Warfare  (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007). Chapter 10.; and Franklin D. Kramer, Stuart 



Alexander Klimburg and Philipp Mirtl 

WP 65: Cyberspace and Governance—A Primer 

11 

ever, this paper argues in favor of the following four-layer model of cyberspace:44 

1. The physical layer contains all the hardware devices, which include routers, 

switches, storage media, satellites, sensors, and other technical conduits, both 

wired and wireless. The physical infrastructure can be located geographically 

in “real space” and is thus subject to different national jurisdictions. If it were 

removed, the overlying layers would disappear as well, as happened in 2011 

in Armenia, where reported 90% of all Internet services crashed due to a re-

tired 75-year-old woman who single-handedly sliced through an underground 

fiber optic cable with her spade.45 

2. The logical layer generally refers to the code, which includes both the soft-

ware and the protocols incorporated within that software.46 Generally speak-

ing, a protocol defines the rules or conventions necessary to obtain a certain 

goal (e.g., communication).  Formalizing a protocol makes it a standard. Soft-

ware, in contrast, is the computer program that implements these protocols. In 

this respect, protocols “are not considered to be satisfactory standards until in-

teroperable independent implementations [within different computer programs] 

have been demonstrated. (This is the embodiment of the “running code” slo-

gan.)”47 Networking protocols are commonly segmented by their function, and 

how close (or how far) away they work from the “end user”—the average com-

puter user. In the most common of segmentation, known as the OSI Model, 

basic everyday client-side applications (such as Windows Internet Explorer) 

operate at the top of the model (level 7), while the aforementioned TCP works 

on Level 4 (the Transport layer) and IP works on Level 3 (the Internet layer). 

Built upon the Web, for instance, more complex applications often combine 

certain aspects of services, which can be eventually combined and applied by 

other applications on even higher levels. This flexibility presents inexhaustible 

                                                                                                                                                                                     

H. Starr, and Larry Wentz, eds., Cyber Power and National Security (Washington, DC: National 
Defence UP, 2009), Chapter 2. 
44 See David Clark, “Characterizing cyberspace: past, present and future,” MIT/CSAIL Working Paper, 
12 March 2010. 
45 Tom Parfitt, “Georgian woman cuts off web access to whole of Armenia,” The Guardian, 6 April 
2011. 
46 See, for instance, Lawrence Lessig, The Future of Ideas. The Fate of the Commons in a Connected 
World, (New York: Random House, 2001), http://www.the-future-of-
ideas.com/download/lessig_FOI.pdf. 23.; and Lawrence Lessig, Code, (New York: Basic Books, 
2006), http://codev2.cc/download+remix/Lessig-Codev2.pdf.  
47 IETF RFC 4677, “The Tao of IETF: A Novice’s Guide to the Internet Engineering Task Force,” 
September 2006, http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4677. 



Alexander Klimburg and Philipp Mirtl 

WP 65: Cyberspace and Governance—A Primer 

12 

possibilities to create new services, which, today, include search engines, 

Weblog, social networking sites, podcasts, Internet telephony, Web mapping, 

etc. Yet, this abundance of capabilities also has a dark side: malware. Essen-

tially, malware (also malicious logic) includes a variety of different Trojans, vi-

ruses and worms.48 Similar to “benign” services, more complex malware often 

combines certain aspects of existing logic (software code).49 In the past, one 

of the first major logic incidents occurred in 1982 when the CIA purportedly 

corrupted the software of a Soviet gas pipeline computer control system which 

was said to result in “the most monumental non-nuclear explosion and fire ev-

er seen from space.”50 Other threats include attacks on the basic infrastructure 

of the Net itself, for instance the Domain Name System (DNS). In April 2010, 

for example, a Chinese ISP introduced the wrong information into their routing 

tables. This caused around 10% of the Internet traffic (theoretically) routed to 

be mapped through China.51 DNS spoofing is usually conducted by intentional-

ly corrupting the information in the Internet routing tables, so that users, who 

are passed from one router to the other, have to traverse a certain target net-

work. Potential consequences could have been dire, as, for instance, all 

webpages (e.g. for a bank or webmail service) could have been successfully 

faked and therefore all login details could have been compromised. However, 

this very case was reported to be “probably unintentional.”52 

3. The content layer describes all the information created, captured, stored and 

processed within cyberspace. Information is defined as “knowledge concern-

ing objects, such as facts, events, things, processes, or ideas”.53 It contains all 

human-readable messages delivered by social media Websites or email; con-

tent of articles and books kept on memory sticks and virtual databases; news 

broadcasted via blogs and Websites; and music, movies and pictures con-

sumed online. However, access to information can also be systematically lim-

                                                           
48 Vangie Beal, “The Difference Between a Computer Virus, Worm and Trojan Horse,” Webopedia, 29 
June 2011. 
49 Alexander Klimburg and Heli Tirmaa-Klaar, Cybersecurity and Cyberpower: Concepts, Conditions 
and Capabilities for Cooperation for Action within the EU, (Brussels: European Parliament, 2011), 
http://www.oiip.ac.at/fileadmin/Unterlagen/Dateien/Publikationen/EP_Study_FINAL.pdf. 48.  
50 Thomas C. Reed, At the Abyss: An Insider’s History of the Cold War  (New York: Random House 
Publishing Group, 2004). 269. 
51 The difference here is between theoretical and actual route propogation – in fact while 10% of the 
Internet traffic could have gone through China, only a small fraction of it actually did. 
52 See Robert McMillan, “A Chinese ISP Momentarily Hijacks the Internet,” PCWorld, 8 April 2010. 
53 ISO/IEC 2382-1:1993, “Information technology – Vocabulary – Part 1: Fundamental terms.” 



Alexander Klimburg and Philipp Mirtl 

WP 65: Cyberspace and Governance—A Primer 

13 

ited. Blocking or removing online content from the Web happens for reasons 

such as protecting intellectual property rights, securing national order or social 

identity. In fact, in recent years, online censorship and content restrictions 

have risen rapidly as demonstrated by the OpenNet Initiative.54 Moreover, in-

formation may take a more abstract form; if computers, for instance, direct 

connected printers on how to print a certain document, it is done by using 

printer control strings. These can be considered to be informational in form but 

logical in purpose.55 The content layer is the focus of the very wide-ranging da-

ta protection debate and encompasses issues such as to what extent even 

“anonymous” information can be extracted from analyzing user behavior. This 

contextual setting is also why the content layer is sometimes referred to as a 

semantic layer. 

4. The social layer is made up of all the people using and shaping the character 

of cyberspace. It is the actual Internet of people and potential relationships, ra-

ther than the implied Internet of hardware and software. Essentially, the social 

layer includes governments as well as private sector, civil society and tech-

nical community actors. However, all share a specific characteristic: while in 

“real” life (extra cyberspace) people can ultimately be identified by their unique 

DNA code, attribution is much more difficult on the Net (intra cyberspace). In 

contrast to the “meat” world, individuals in cyberspace facilitates establishment 

of multiple identities for the user. And alternatively, one single virtual identity 

can have multiple human users (e.g., the same NYT online office account be-

ing used by different employees). This has not only important implications in 

terms of security or copyright protection but also raises interesting questions 

about how the cyber world plays into the real world. In reference to last year’s 

revolutions in Tunisia and Egypt, for instance, it has been argued that the ex-

change via Facebook played an important role in giving birth to “a pan-Arab 

youth movement dedicated to spreading democracy in a region without it.”56 

The protests in Tunisia, Egypt, Libya, Yemen, and Syria have even been 

characterized as a “’global political awaking’—a movement for change that is 

                                                           
54 See http://opennet.net/.  
55 Martin C. Libicki, Cyberdeterrance and Cyberwar  (Pittsburgh: RAND Corporation, 2009). 12. 
56 David D. Kirkpatrick and David E. Sanger, “A Tunisian-Egyptian Link That Shook Arab History,” New 
York Times, 13 February 2011. 



Alexander Klimburg and Philipp Mirtl 

WP 65: Cyberspace and Governance—A Primer 

14 

enabled and accelerated by modern technology’.”57 

This way of thinking about cyberspace does not deliver a single best definition. Ra-

ther, it tries to make the concept more accessible. In fact, for a comprehensive un-

derstanding, all four layers must be considered equally. Cyberthreats, for instance, 

might arise at the physical layer (destruction of wires) as well as on the logical (mali-

cious software), informational (compromising information), or social layer (corrupting 

people). In the end, however, all cyberattacks ultimately seek to influence the “social 

layer”. 

  

                                                           
57 David Ignatius, “What Happens When the Arab Spring Turns to Summer?,” Foreign Policy, 22 April 
2011. 



Alexander Klimburg and Philipp Mirtl 

WP 65: Cyberspace and Governance—A Primer 

15 

4. The Five Mandates of National Cybersecurity 

Within the general context of discussing “national cybersecurity,” it is very important 

to keep in mind that this is not one single subject area; rather, it is possible to split the 

issue of national cybersecurity into five distinct perspectives or “mandates”, each of 

them usually covered by different government departments, and this is not an ideal 

state. Unfortunately, there is frequently a significant lack of coordination between 

these organisations, and this lack of coordination is perhaps one of the most serious 

organisational challenges within the domain of national cybersecurity.  

Furthermore, overlap between themes and ambiguity is the rule, not the exception, in 

cybersecurity. The physical reality of national cybersecurity is that all these topics are 

largely overlapping. However, the bureaucratic reality, as lived in nearly all national 

governments, is that these subject areas are kept separate from each other in distinct 

“mandates”. Each mandate has developed its own emphasis and even its own lexi-

con, despite the fact that they are all simply different facets of the same problem. 

1. Military Cyberactivities: The term “cyberwar” is being used in a number of 

inappropriate or misleading contexts (for instance, when referring to cyber-

espionage). Therefore, it is true to say “cyberwarfare is a loaded term”.58 Con-

sequently, this mandate has been entitled “military cyberactivities” and en-

compasses a range of actions (both offensive and defensive) sometimes also 

covered by non-military organisations (such as the intelligence community). 

From an academic point of view, however, the term “cyberwar” is useful to dis-

tinguish it from all other cyberattacks, in particular ones using sophisticated 

cyberweapons.59 The Internet security company McAfee has warned since 

2007 that, in its opinion, a “virtual arms race” is occurring in cyberspace with a 

number of countries deploying cyberweapons.60 Many governments are build-

ing capabilities to wage cyberwar,61 while some NATO reports have claimed 

                                                           
58 See William Jackson, “How can we be at cyberwar if we don’t know what it is?,” Washington 
Technology, 22 March 2010. 
59 The term “cyberweapons” is equally contentious, as it can range from an email program to some-
thing like Stuxnet. In this context, a “cyberweapon” is understood not to be an “attack-kit” (i.e., a pro-
gram decided to produce a “cyberweapon”) but a finished product.  
60 See Zeenews, “US, China, Russia have ‘cyber weapons’: McAfee,” Zeenews.com, 18 November 
2009. 
61 See, Michael W. Cheek, “What is Cyber War Anyway? A Conversation with Jeff Carr, Author of 
‘Inside Cyber Warfare’,” The new new Internet, 2 March 2010. 



Alexander Klimburg and Philipp Mirtl 

WP 65: Cyberspace and Governance—A Primer 

16 

that up to 120 countries are developing a military cybercapability.62 These ca-

pabilities can be interpreted as simply one more tool of warfare, similar to air-

power, which would be used only within a clearly defined tactical military mis-

sion (for instance, for shutting down an air-defence system). This is called 

here “battlefield cyberwarfare,” and the effects are limited to the operational-

tactical environment. Alternatively, the emphasis can lie on “strategic 

cyberwarfare”—the ability to strike at the heart of an (advanced) nation by un-

dermining its economy and its basic ability to function. There is no legal defini-

tion of cyberwar, although since 2010 there has been an increasing interna-

tional understanding on two key issues regarding cyberwar: first, that the Laws 

of Armed Conflict apply also in cyberspace and, second, that a “cyberwar at-

tack” is said to have occurred if “the level of damage is approximate to a phys-

ical attack.”63 Military Cyberactivities, therefore, encompass three different 

mandates: enabling Network Centric Warfare (NCW) capabilities, Battlefield 

Cyberwarfare, and Strategic Cyberwarfare.  

2. Counter-Cybercrime: Cybercrime is increasingly considered the most ad-

vanced and profitable of all criminal enterprises. Estimates of the cost of cy-

bercrime to business range as high as 1 trillion dollars for 2009,64 and by some 

estimates it has long since overtaken the drug trade in terms of business vol-

ume.65 Cybercrime activities can include a wide swath of activities that impact 

both the individual citizen directly (e.g., identity theft) and corporations (e.g., 

the theft of intellectual property). At least as significant for national security, 

however, is the logistical support capability cybercrime can offer to anyone in-

terested in conducting cyberattacks. This includes hosting services, the sale of 

stolen identities and credit card numbers, money-laundering services,66 and 

even the provision of entire hacking tools and attack-kits to enable large-scale 

                                                           
62 See Julian Hale, “NATO Official: Cyber Attack Systems Proliferating,” DefenceNews, 23 March 
2010. 
63 This was agreed at the ‘Cyber 15’ deliberations conducted at the UN in the summer of 2010. 
64 See Elinor Mills, “Study: Cybercrime cost firms $1 trillion globally,” CNET News, 28 January 2009. 
65 See John Leyden, “Cybercrime ‘More Lucrative’ than Drugs. At least phishing fraudsters don’t have 
Uzis,” The Register 2005. These numbers have increasingly been called into question, and studies 
from 2011 and 2012 have provided much lower estimates – which have proven to be equally conten-
tious.   
66 See Jeremy Kirk, “5 Indicted in Long-running Cybercrime Operation,” CSO Online, 2 September 
2009. 



Alexander Klimburg and Philipp Mirtl 

WP 65: Cyberspace and Governance—A Primer 

17 

cyber-campaigns.67 There are convincing indications that Russian cybercrime 

syndicates played a role in the cyberattacks on Georgia and Estonia,68 to 

name but two examples. This is also where cybercrime interacts not only with 

military cyberactivities, but also with cyberterrorism. Cyberterrorism is a highly 

contentious term. There is a prevalent concern the term could be used to se-

verely criminalize not only “minor acts of cybercrime” (often called hacktivisim), 

but also any type of online expression critical of a government. These con-

cerns are largely overplayed, as there is a relatively clear acceptance that the 

difference between all forms of “crime” is the effect—a minor nuisance is cer-

tainly not an act of terrorism. Cyberterrorism is considered to be an act of ter-

rorism solely carried out with “cyber” means and the destruction from which 

rises to the level of a conventional terrorist attack. As of 2012, there has not 

been anything approaching the classification of a “cyberterrorist” attack, de-

spite, for instance, threats by the hacker group Anonymous to “bring down the 

Internet.”69 This said, there have been a rising number of criminal acts, includ-

ing attempts at mass disruption of communications, and this suggests cyber-

terrorism will be an issue for the future.  

3. Intelligence and Counter-intelligence: Distinguishing cyberespionage from 

cybercrime and military cyberactivities is not uncontroversial. In fact, they all 

depend on similar vectors of attack and similar technology. In practice, how-

ever, serious espionage cases (both regarding intellectual property as well as 

government secrets) are a class of their own, while at the same time it can be 

very difficult to ascertain for sure if the perpetrator is a nation-state or a crimi-

nal-group operating on behalf of a nation-state, or indeed operating on its own. 

Whoever is actually behind the attack, cyberespionage probably represents 

the most damaging part of cybercrime (if included in the category). Lost intel-

lectual property, for instance, was said to have cost the British economy in 

2011 UKP 9.2 billion a year.70 Cyberespionage, when directed toward states, 

                                                           
67 For an early mention of this see BBC, “Cyber crime tool kits go on sale,” BBC News Online, 4 
September 2009. 
68 See Jeff Carr et al., “Phase I Report: Russia/Georgia Cyber War – Findings and Analysis,” Project 
Grey Goose, 17 October 2008.; Jeff Carr et al., “Project Grey Goose Phase II Report: The evolving 
state of cyber warfare,” Project Grey Groose, 20 March 2009.; and US Cyber Consequences Unit, 
“Overview by the US-CCU of the Cyber Campaign Against Georgia in August of 2008,” US-CCU 
Special Report, August 2009. 
69 Tyler Holman, “Anonymous threatens to bring down the internet,” Neowin.net, 27 March 2012. 
70 Michael Holden, “Cyber crime costs UK $43.5 billion a year: study,” Reuters, 17 February 2011. 



Alexander Klimburg and Philipp Mirtl 

WP 65: Cyberspace and Governance—A Primer 

18 

also makes it necessary to develop specific foreign policy response mecha-

nisms capable of dealing with the inherent ambiguity of actor-nature in cyber-

space. At the same time, counter-intelligence activities (i.e., detecting and 

combating the most sophisticated cyberintrusions) very often will depend upon 

other types of intelligence activity, including offensive intelligence collection 

but also extensive information sharing between international partners.  

4. Critical Infrastructure Protection and National Crisis Management: Critical 

Infrastructure Protection (CIP) has become the catch-all term that seeks to in-

volve the providers of essential services of a country within a national security 

framework. As most of the service providers (such as public utilities, finance, 

or telecommunications) are in the private sector, it is necessary to extend 

some sort of government support to help protect them and the essential ser-

vices they provide from modern threats. While the original focus of these pro-

grams was often terrorism, today the majority of all CIP activity is directly con-

nected to cyber—usually cybercrime and cyberespionage. In this context, Na-

tional Crisis Management must be extended by an additional cyber compo-

nent. This includes institutional structures which enhance the cooperation be-

tween state and non-state actors both nationally and internationally, as well as 

a stable crisis communication network and an applicable legal framework to 

exchange relevant information.71 

5. Cyberdiplomacy and Internet Governance: Claiming that the “pursuit of 

classical diplomacy will no longer suffice,” in 2002 Evan H. Potter suggested 

that cyberdiplomacy was about “how diplomacy is adapting to the new global 

information order.”72 Taking the information revolution as point of departure, 

Potter claimed that information technology was the “primary mover”73 behind 

this change. However, more recent accounts dealing with the impact of infor-

mation technology on the overall conduct of diplomacy seem to avoid any ref-

erence to the term cyberdiplomacy.74 Interestingly, in a 2010 paper cyber-

                                                           
71 See, for instance, Austrian Federal Chancellery, “National ICT Security Strategy Austria,” (Vienna: 
Digital Austria, 2012), 14-5. 
72 Evan H. Potter, ed. Cyber-Diplomacy: Managing Foreign Policy in the Twenty-First Century 
(Quebec: McGill-Queen’s University Press, 2002), 7. 
73 Ibid. 
74 See, for instance, Joseph S. Nye, The Future of Power  (New York: PublicAffairs, 2011). 100-9.; 
Keith Hamilton and Richard Langhorne, The Practice of Diplomacy. Its evolution, theory and 
administration.  (New York: Routledge, 2011). 229-54.; and Philip Seib, Real-Time Diplomacy. Politics 
and Power in the Social Media Era  (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2012). 



Alexander Klimburg and Philipp Mirtl 

WP 65: Cyberspace and Governance—A Primer 

19 

diplomacy has even been alternatively defined as being “about managing a 

world that is not just borderless but can function best when connectivity is al-

most seamless.”75 The paper was prepared in response to bilateral efforts be-

tween the US and Russia in fostering their cooperation on cybersecurity in 

2009. Conveniently, this definition also applies to multilateral efforts to pro-

mote norms and standards for cyber behavior in fora such as the United Na-

tions, or processes intended to establish “cyber confidence building measures” 

similar to those which have been initiated by the Organization for Security and 

Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) in 2012. In this context, cyberdiplomacy be-

comes similar to other diplomatic efforts on topics such as arms control and 

counter-proliferation. Internet Governance, in contrast, is largely a multi-

stakeholder activity, and probably the most international of all mandates. It is 

generally referred to as the process by which a number of state and non-state 

actors interact to manage what, in effect, is the logical layer of cyberspace. As 

one of the most understated and least understood aspects of national cyber-

security, it is described at more length below. Internet Governance, in contrast, 

is largely a multi-stakeholder activity, and is probably the most international of 

all mandates. 

As said in the introduction to this chapter, the reality of these different mandates is 

that they are each dealt with by different organizational groups not only within gov-

ernment, but also within the non-state sector. This is not a positive development. 

Normatively speaking, all of these mandates need to be holistically engaged, with 

overall coordination, if one is to develop a comprehensive national cybersecurity per-

spective. However, developing this “comprehensive” view is often a luxury most prac-

titioners of cybersecurity can simply not afford due to resource restraints. The reality 

is each of these mandates has developed its own specialized terms, priorities, and 

even basic principles and it is unusual to interact with more than one other mandate. 

The “silofication” of national cybersecurity is, therefore, not a challenge for govern-

ment departments, but indeed overall for the field as a whole. 

  

                                                           
75 Franz-Stefan Gady and Greg Austin, Russia, The United States, and Cyber Diplomacy. Opening the 
Doors, (New York: EastWest Institute, 2010), 
http://www.ewi.info/system/files/USRussiaCyber_WEB.pdf. 16. 



Alexander Klimburg and Philipp Mirtl 

WP 65: Cyberspace and Governance—A Primer 

20 

5. Cybersecurity in Internet Governance 

Cyberspace only exists within parameters constructed and regulated by human be-

ings. These parameters have, until now, not been created directly by governments, 

but have rather arisen from the “bottom-up” in a process that is often referred to as 

the self-regulation of the Internet.76 The process is often transcribed as “Internet gov-

ernance”, which has been defined as “the development and application by Govern-

ments, the private sector and civil society, in their respective roles, of shared princi-

ples, norms, rules, decision-making procedures, and programmes that shape the 

evolution and use of the Internet.”77 

The Internet is a relatively new environment for human activities, and it was created 

with other purposes in mind than that for which it is now used. The basic Internet was 

never intended to be “secure”; security was always more of an afterthought than an 

original design feature.78 In essence, the DNA of the Internet was to be a “trusting, 

open” system. It did not appear feasible twenty years ago that not only would critical 

infrastructures partially come to depend on the Internet, but the Internet itself would 

be, at least in part, considered critical for everyday societal needs. 

The debate related to Internet governance issues dates at least back to the early 

1990s, when the Harvard Information Infrastructure Project (HIIP)79 brought together 

experts from government, industry, and academia to elaborate on emerging policy 

issues related to the development, use and growth of the global information infra-

structure (most notably the Internet).80 The HIIP was intended to serve as an inter-

disciplinary forum for economists, lawyers, political scientists and technologists, and 

culminated in a series of different publications. Their basic assumption was that the 

Internet had an unprecedented impact on our existing world order. As HIIP key re-

searcher Brian Kahin and Charles Nesson put it: 

                                                           
76 See, for instance, Peng Hwa Ang, “Self Regulation after WGIG,” ed. William J. Drake, Reforming 
Internet Governance: Perspectives from the Working Group on Internet Governance (New York: 
United Nations ICT Task Force, 2005),  http://www.wgig.org/docs/book/toc2.html. 
77 WGIG, “Report from the Working Group on Internet Governance (WSIS-II/PC-3/DOC/05),” (Geneva: 
ITU, 2005), 3. 
78 See, for instance, Jeanette Hofman, “The Libertarian Origins of Cybercrime: Unintended Side-
Effects of a Political Utopia,” CARR Discussion Paper, April 2010.  
79 See http://ksgnotes1.harvard.edu/IIP/HIIP_PG.nsf. 
80 Thanks to Prof. Wolfgang Kleinwächter for this point. 



Alexander Klimburg and Philipp Mirtl 

WP 65: Cyberspace and Governance—A Primer 

21 

“Our experience of geographic space has been transformed by the information 

revolution, as it was by the railroad and air travel. But the transformation now 

underway on the Internet is not only greater and qualitatively different. It has 

collapsed the world, transcending and blurring political boundaries in the pro-

cess. It gives individuals instant, affordable access to other individuals, wher-

ever they may be, and it enables each to publish to the world.”81 

However, transcending national borders does not simultaneously imply the dissolu-

tion of the state. With physical power over people and infrastructure, states will re-

main important actors. What is clearly changing is the way this power is exercised. In 

an environment where the (trans-border) interaction between people can hardly be 

confined to the sole jurisdiction of a single state-actor, overlapping responsibilities will 

make it necessary for governments to collaborate with the private sector and with civil 

society actors.82 

In the course of the 1990s, the rather academic debates over Internet governance 

reached a broader public. When it became clear that the global DNS was not only a 

single point of technical failure, but also a single point for policy decisions about sur-

veillance and control of access to cyberspace, questions about the difference be-

tween technical management on the one hand, and regulatory control on the other 

were posed. For instance, was the decision to enter a TLD into the root zone file a 

mere technical issue or is it a public policy issue? For Milton Mueller, “[t]he uncom-

fortable fact is that the two meanings of ‘Internet governance’ are inseparably 

linked.”83 

Increasingly, state actors became aware they did not really understand the concrete 

subject matter of Internet governance. Therefore, in the final document to the 2003 

United Nation’s (UN) World Summit on the Information Society (WSIS-I), “the repre-

sentatives of the peoples of the world”84 called for setting up a collaborative Working 

Group on Internet Governance (WGIG). The WGIG should be composed of states as 

                                                           
81 Brian Kahin and Charles Nesson, eds., Borders in Cyberspace: Information Policy and the Global 
Information Infrastructure (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1997). 
82 See Joel R. Reidenberg, “Governing Networks and Rule-Making in Cyberspace,” in Borders in 
Cyberspace: Information Policy and the Global Information Infrastructure, ed. Brian Kahin and Charles 
Nesson (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1997). 
83 Milton Mueller, Ruling the Root: Internet Governance and the Taming of Cyberspace, (Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press 2002). 10. 
84 WSIS, “Geneva Declaration of Principles (WSIS-03/GENEVA/DOC/0004),” (Geneva: ITU, 2003). 



Alexander Klimburg and Philipp Mirtl 

WP 65: Cyberspace and Governance—A Primer 

22 

well as the private sector and civil society actors. It had the aim to “investigate and 

make proposals for action, as appropriate, on the governance of [the] Internet by 

2005.”85 After four meetings and with full and active participation of multiple stake-

holders, including governments (44%), the private sector (28%) and non-

governmental actors (28%) from both developing (59%) and developed countries 

(41%)86—the WGIG delivered a report87 (and an accompanying background report88) 

which served as input for the 2005 WSIS in Tunis (WSIS-II).89 The main recommen-

dation of the WGIG was the creation of a forum which 

“could address [. . .] issues, that are cross-cutting and multidimensional and 

that either affect more than one institution, are not dealt with by any institution, 

or are not addressed in a coordinated manner.”90 

This recommendation fundamentally inspired WSIS-II and led to the creation of a 

multi-stakeholder Internet Governance Forum (IGF), which should “identify emerging 

issues, bring them to the attention of the relevant bodies and the general public, and, 

where appropriate, make recommendations.”91 

However, WGIG did not only recommend the creation of an Internet-related forum, 

but also provided a working definition of Internet governance eventually adopted by 

WSIS-II. By clearly reflecting the multi-stakeholder nature behind WGIG and the IGF 

the definition reads as follows: 

“Internet governance is the development and application by governments, the 

private sector and civil society, in their respective roles, of shared principles, 

norms, rules, decision-making procedures, and programmes that shape the 

evolution and use of the Internet.”92 

This definition is intentionally broad in scope and touches upon a myriad of different 

                                                           
85 Ibid., para. 50.  
86 John Mathiason, Internet Governance. The new frontier of global institutions  (New York, NY: 
Routledge, 2009). 118. 
87 WGIG, “Report from the Working Group on Internet Governance (WSIS-II/PC-3/DOC/05),” 3. 
88 WGIG, Background Report, (Geneva: WGIG, 2005), 
http://www.wgig.org/docs/BackgroundReport.doc. 
89 For the website of WSIS-II, see: http://www.itu.int/wsis/tunis/index.html. 
90 WGIG, “Report from the Working Group on Internet Governance (WSIS-II/PC-3/DOC/05),” 10f. 
91 WSIS, “Tunis Agenda for the Information Society (WSIS-05/TUNIS/DOC/6(Rev. 1)-E),” (Tunis: ITU, 
2005), para. 72-82. 
92 Ibid., para. 34. 



Alexander Klimburg and Philipp Mirtl 

WP 65: Cyberspace and Governance—A Primer 

23 

issue areas93 and actors. This is also why, in Internet governance, one cannot speak 

of one single Internet governance regime, but of multiple regimes (including the DNS 

regime, intellectual property regime, etc.).94 The key issue here is that these regimes 

are of highly diverse and sometimes contradicting nature—the interests of human 

rights and intellectual property, for instance, are not always aligned—but also need to 

be set in both policy and technical contexts. Both these larger contexts are them-

selves largely in flux, depending on current political affairs or the state of the techno-

logical evolution. 

Internet governance can therefore be considered not only a young, highly dynamic 

but also an essentially reactive policy field that seeks to reconcile the technical and 

policy heritage of the Internet with its ever-growing modern-day importance. Govern-

ments as a whole have been relative latecomers to Internet governance, despite its 

obvious political importance. The EU has considerable potential to play a formative 

role in evolving Internet governance, and help promote the development of a more 

secure Internet. 

 

5.1. Technical Internet Governance: Ad Hoc 

Internet governance can be subdivided into two domains: the technical domain and 

the policy domain. The technical domain predominantly consists of volunteers and 

civil society, and it can be described as completely “ad hoc”. One of the most im-

portant organizations is the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), which has, since 

1986, developed many of the key software protocols and technical fixes the Internet 

depends upon today. The IETF is famously anarchic, not having any official laws, 

membership criteria or indeed much more than a basic organization. The members of 

the IETF “reject: kings, presidents, and voting. We believe in: rough consensus and 

running code.”95 Normally meeting three times a year, the 300 to 1,300 software en-

gineers do not vote on proposals; instead, they hum. Whichever group is perceived to 

                                                           
93 See, for instance, William H. Dutton and Malcolm Peltu, “The emerging Internet governance mosaic: 
connecting the pieces,” Information Polity 12, no. 1-2 (2007). 
94 Thanks to Prof. William Dutton for this point. 
95 Attributed to Dave Clark (see, for instance, Borsook, “How Anarchy Works: On location with the 
masters of the metaverse, the Internet Engineering Task Force.”). 



Alexander Klimburg and Philipp Mirtl 

WP 65: Cyberspace and Governance—A Primer 

24 

have “hummed louder” carries the (non) vote.96 Other groups, such as the Institute 

for Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE), are more organized, but work in a 

similar “bottom-up” approach with absolutely minimal governmental influence. The 

IEEE has over 350,000 members and addresses issues regarding connectivity (such 

as Bluetooth, Wireless and broadband). Groups such as the IETF and the IEEE can 

justifiably claim to have built the Internet, one protocol at a time. Governments have 

mostly played only a supportive role in this process. 

 

5.2. Policy Internet Governance: Institutionalized 

The policy domain of Internet governance is considerably more organized. ICANN, 

the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers is the one organization 

that comes closest to having an assigning, coordinating or regulating function (and 

especially a policy function) on the Internet. ICANN is a “nonprofit public-benefit cor-

poration,” according to the laws of the US State of California, and is based at the 

University of Southern California. Its purpose is to “coordinate, at the overall level, the 

global Internet's systems of unique identifiers.”97 Founded in 1998 on the basis of 

preexisting technical organizations, ICANN was the direct result of President Clin-

ton’s promise to move the Internet out of the government structures98 and to open it 

to the public and to private commerce. Under a contract with the US Department of 

Commerce, ICANN was to “manage Internet names and addresses,” a relatively in-

nocuous-sounding mission encompassing three of the most vital functions of the In-

ternet: first, the allocation of Internet Protocol (IP) number resources for individual 

computers or machines, and directly corresponding to these, Domain Name Service 

(DNS) “names,” and the allocation of the so-called Top Level Domains (TLDs)99 to 

registries which  assign these identifiers to individual users and organizations across 

                                                           
96 In its very existence, the IETF is “unofficial”—it does not legally exist, and is officially part of the 
Internet Society (ISOC), which itself is one of the “founding organizations” of the Internet. 
97 See, for instance, ICANN, “Bylaws for Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers. A 
California Nonprofit Public-Benefit Corporation,” 16 March 2012, 
http://www.icann.org/en/general/bylaws.htm. 
98 See, for instance, Milton Mueller, “Dancing the Quango: ICANN and the Privatization of International 
Governance,” in Conference on New technologies and International Governance (School of Advanced 
International Studies, Johns Hopkins University, Washington, DC, 11-12 February 2002). 
99 There are a number of different TLDs. The “generic Top Level Domains” (gTLD) include all Internet 
addresses that, for instance, end with .com, .org, or .info. National domains are known as “country 
code Top Level Domains” (ccTLD) and, for instance, end with .de, .fr, or .uk. 



Alexander Klimburg and Philipp Mirtl 

WP 65: Cyberspace and Governance—A Primer 

25 

the globe. Taken together, these three functions represent a considerable segment of 

Internet functionality. 

ICANN has grown with the Internet100—from a marginal budget in 1999 to USD 60 

million in 2010. Its nature has changed considerably as well. On the one hand, gov-

ernments have shown increasing interest in the formative work of ICANN, and the 

Government Advisory Council (GAC) has become especially active. While ICANN 

was “released” from US government control in October 2009, the US government still 

retains significant influence—more than other countries represented on the GAC. The 

increased interests of governments in ICANN, the rise in relative strength of national 

and generic registries, technical developments as well as the general “need for a 

mission” has meant ICANN has increasingly positioned itself as a security actor. This 

is especially evident in the rollout of DNSSEC (the new DNS protocol of the Internet), 

which is one of ICANN’s main functions. Furthermore, the increasing likelihood of 

attacks on the core infrastructure of the Internet (e.g., DNS and BGP Protocols) has 

made a case for the establishment of a global DNS-CERT, an idea that ICANN has 

been very interested in promoting. However, the International Telecommunications 

Union (ITU) has also showed considerable interest in assuming this role.  

The ITU has often sought to challenge ICANN’s position as the principal body in In-

ternet governance. As an UN-agency, it has played a key role in many of the UN ini-

tiatives in cyberspace, including helping to organize the Internet Governance Forum 

(IGF) and the World Summit of the Information Society (WSIS) Process. The IGF has 

become an annual event for the global stakeholder community, where governments, 

private sector stakeholders and other interested groups present their views and pro-

posals for Internet-related issues. The ITU has mainly contributed to Internet govern-

ance within the technical domain. An ITU High Level Expert Group on Cybersecurity 

was established in 2007. It serves as a consultation forum for information security 

experts from different regions and produces reports on cybersecurity. It has also 

sought to promote its own dedicated cyber-centre, IMPACT, located in Malaysia. In 

2008, the controversial ITU-T Resolution 69101 on “Non-discriminatory access and 

use of the Internet resources” effectively called for an “internationalization” of the In-
                                                           
100 See Alexander Klimburg, “Ruling the Domain: (Self) Regulation and the Security of the Internet,” in 
11th Meeting of the ICANN Studienkreis (Hilton Budapest, 28-29 April 2011). 
101 See World Telecommunication Standardization Assembly, “Resolution 69 – Non-discriminatory 
access and use of Internet resources,” (Johannesburg: ITU-T, 2008). 



Alexander Klimburg and Philipp Mirtl 

WP 65: Cyberspace and Governance—A Primer 

26 

ternet and was principally backed by Arab states, Russia and China. Around the 

same time, ITU Secretary General Touré referred to participation in the IGF as a 

“waste of time.” In fact, he has often indicated that the 192-memberstate “ITU family” 

was a more appropriate forum for many of the looming global issues in cybersecuri-

ty.102 While the EU initially was a strong supporter of the ITU in calling for a better 

“internationalization” of Internet governance, it also welcomed the US decision to 

“free” ICANN103 in 2009, and acknowledged that a significant step had been taken.104 

Recently, a number of EU Member States have been much less active in supporting 

ITU’s ambitions. In a landmark summit in Guadalajara, Mexico, in October 2010, the-

se countries joined the US and other OECD nations in limiting an expansion of the 

ITU’s role in Internet governance.  

National governments have shown a growing interest in Internet governance. What 

was previously described as operating under a “multi-stakeholder model” (including 

governments, private corporations and the civil society) is coming under increased 

pressure from national governments trying to expand their relative importance in the 

domain at the expense of the other stakeholders, according to some academics.105 

The GAC is also trying to upgrade its importance to a body which can influence deci-

sions of the ICANN board. Interestingly, the present US proposal to this mirrors that 

of European delegates 2005, which was blocked by the then US administration. The 

Internet Governance Forum is also attempting to redefine itself as part of the renewal 

of its five-year mandate, a redefinition process governments initially tried to reserve 

for themselves as their own prerogative. But, as the ITU General Meeting showed, 

there is still substantial support for the multi-stakeholder approach, and signs that 

Western OECD nations in particular are joining together to support it. 

  

                                                           
102 See Monika Ermert, “Controversy Over Internet Governance: ITU Families And ICANN 
Cosmetics?,” IP-Watch, 18 November 2008. 
103 From the Joint Project Agreement (JPA) that effectively made ICANN subordinate to the Secretary 
of Commerce. 
104 See European Commission, “European Commission welcomes US move to more independent, 
accountable, international internet governance (IP/09/1397),” Press Releases, 30 September 2009. 
105 Including comments made by Prof. Viktor Mayer-Schönberger of the Oxford Internet Institute (OII) 
at the Domain pulse 2011 conference in Vienna (see http://www.domainpulse.de/de/programm). 



Alexander Klimburg and Philipp Mirtl 

WP 65: Cyberspace and Governance—A Primer 

27 

6. References 
 

Ang, Peng Hwa. “Self Regulation after WGIG.” In Reforming Internet Governance: 
Perspectives from the Working Group on Internet Governance, edited by 
William J. Drake New York: United Nations ICT Task Force, 2005. 
http://www.wgig.org/docs/book/toc2.html. 

Austrian Federal Chancellery. “National ICT Security Strategy Austria.” Vienna: 
Digital Austria, 2012. 

BBC. “Cyber crime tool kits go on sale.” BBC News Online, 4 September 2009. 

Beal, Vangie. “The Difference Between a Computer Virus, Worm and Trojan Horse.” 
Webopedia, 29 June 2011. 

Borsook, Paulina. “How Anarchy Works: On location with the masters of the 
metaverse, the Internet Engineering Task Force.” Wired, October 1995. 

Carr, Jeff, Andrew Conway, Billy Rios, Derek Plansky, Greg Walton, Jeremy Baldwin, 
Preston Werntz, and Rafal Rohozinski. “Phase I Report: Russia/Georgia 
Cyber War – Findings and Analysis.” Project Grey Goose, 17 October 2008. 

Carr, Jeff, Billy Rios, Derek Plansky, Greg Walton, Matt Devost, Ned Moran, 
Rebecca Givner-Forbes, and Shannon Silverstein. “Project Grey Goose Phase 
II Report: The evolving state of cyber warfare.” Project Grey Groose, 20 March 
2009. 

CERN. “The website of the world’s first-ever web server.”  http://info.cern.ch/. 

Cheek, Michael W. “What is Cyber War Anyway? A Conversation with Jeff Carr, 
Author of ‘Inside Cyber Warfare’.” The new new Internet, 2 March 2010. 

Clark, David. “Characterizing cyberspace: past, present and future.” MIT/CSAIL 
Working Paper, 12 March 2010. 

Dutton, William H., and Malcolm Peltu. “The emerging Internet governance mosaic: 
connecting the pieces.” Information Polity 12, no. 1-2 (2007): 63-81. 

Ermert, Monika. “Controversy Over Internet Governance: ITU Families And ICANN 
Cosmetics?” IP-Watch, 18 November 2008. 

European Commission. “European Commission welcomes US move to more 
independent, accountable, international internet governance (IP/09/1397).” 
Press Releases, 30 September 2009. 

Gady, Franz-Stefan, and Greg Austin. Russia, The United States, and Cyber 
Diplomacy. Opening the Doors.  New York: EastWest Institute, 2010. 
http://www.ewi.info/system/files/USRussiaCyber_WEB.pdf. 

Gibson, William. “Burning Chrome [1982].” In Burning Chrome. 179-204. New York: 
HarperCollins Publishers Inc., 2003. 

———. Neuromancer.  New York: Ace Books, 2000 [1984]. 

Hale, Julian. “NATO Official: Cyber Attack Systems Proliferating.” DefenceNews, 23 
March 2010. 

Hamilton, Keith, and Richard Langhorne. The Practice of Diplomacy. Its evolution, 
theory and administration.  New York: Routledge, 2011. 



Alexander Klimburg and Philipp Mirtl 

WP 65: Cyberspace and Governance—A Primer 

28 

Hofman, Jeanette. “The Libertarian Origins of Cybercrime: Unintended Side-Effects 
of a Political Utopia.” CARR Discussion Paper, April 2010. 

Holden, Michael. “Cyber crime costs UK $43.5 billion a year: study.” Reuters, 17 
February 2011. 

Holman, Tyler. “Anonymous threatens to bring down the internet.” Neowin.net, 27 
March 2012. 

ICANN. “Bylaws for Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers. A 
California Nonprofit Public-Benefit Corporation.” 16 March 2012, 
http://www.icann.org/en/general/bylaws.htm. 

———. “IPv6 Factsheet.”  http://www.icann.org/en/announcements/announcement-
26oct07.htm. 

———. “To 4,294,967,296 and Beyond – Under 10% of IPv4 Space Remains: 
Adoption of IPv6 Is Essential.”  
http://www.icann.org/en/announcements/announcement-29jan10-en.htm. 

IETF RFC 1122. “Requirements for Internet Hosts – Communication Layers.” 
October 1989, http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc1122. 

IETF RFC 4677. “The Tao of IETF: A Novice’s Guide to the Internet Engineering 
Task Force.” September 2006, http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4677. 

Ignatius, David. “What Happens When the Arab Spring Turns to Summer?” Foreign 
Policy, 22 April 2011. 

Internet World Stats. “Internet Growth Statistics.”  
http://www.internetworldstats.com/emarketing.htm. 

———. “Internet Users in the World. Distribution by World Region.”  
http://www.internetworldstats.com/stats.htm. 

———. “Surfing and Site Guide.”  http://www.internetworldstats.com/surfing.htm#1. 

ISO/IEC 2382-1:1993. “Information technology – Vocabulary – Part 1: Fundamental 
terms.” 

ISO/IEC 7498-1:1994. “Information technology – Open Systems Interconnection – 
Basic Reference Model: The Basic Model.” 

Jackson, William. “How can we be at cyberwar if we don’t know what it is?” 
Washington Technology, 22 March 2010. 

Kahin, Brian, and Charles Nesson, eds. Borders in Cyberspace: Information Policy 
and the Global Information Infrastructure. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1997. 

Kirk, Jeremy. “5 Indicted in Long-running Cybercrime Operation.” CSO Online, 2 
September 2009. 

Kirkpatrick, David D., and David E. Sanger. “A Tunisian-Egyptian Link That Shook 
Arab History.” New York Times, 13 February 2011. 

Klimburg, Alexander. “Ruling the Domain: (Self) Regulation and the Security of the 
Internet.” In 11th Meeting of the ICANN Studienkreis. Hilton Budapest, 28-29 
April 2011. 

Klimburg, Alexander, and Heli Tirmaa-Klaar. Cybersecurity and Cyberpower: 
Concepts, Conditions and Capabilities for Cooperation for Action within the 



Alexander Klimburg and Philipp Mirtl 

WP 65: Cyberspace and Governance—A Primer 

29 

EU.  Brussels: European Parliament, 2011. 
http://www.oiip.ac.at/fileadmin/Unterlagen/Dateien/Publikationen/EP_Study_FI
NAL.pdf. 

Kramer, Franklin D., Stuart H. Starr, and Larry Wentz, eds. Cyber Power and 
National Security. Washington, DC: National Defence UP, 2009. 

Kuehl, Daniel T. “From Cyberspace to Cyberpower: Defining the Problem.” In 
Cyberpower and National Security, edited by Franklin Kramer et al. 
Washington, DC: National Defense UP, 2009. 

Kurbalija, Jovan. An Introduction to Internet Governance.  Genève: DiploFoundation, 
2010. http://archive1.diplomacy.edu/poolbin.asp?IDPool=1060. 

Leiner, Barry M., Vinton G. Cerf, David D. Clark, Robert E. Kahn, Leonard Kleinrock, 
Daniel C. Lynch, Jon Postel, Larry G. Roberts, and Stephen Wolff. “A Brief 
History of the Internet.” ISOC, http://www.internetsociety.org/internet/internet-
51/history-internet/brief-history-internet. 

Lessig, Lawrence. Code.  New York: Basic Books, 2006. 
http://codev2.cc/download+remix/Lessig-Codev2.pdf. 

———. The Future of Ideas. The Fate of the Commons in a Connected World.  New 
York: Random House, 2001. http://www.the-future-of-
ideas.com/download/lessig_FOI.pdf. 

Leyden, John. “Cybercrime ‘More Lucrative’ than Drugs. At least phishing fraudsters 
don’t have Uzis.” The Register, 2005. 

Libicki, Martin C. Conquest in Cyberspace. National Security and Information 
Warfare.  Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007. 

———. Cyberdeterrance and Cyberwar.  Pittsburgh: RAND Corporation, 2009. 

Mathiason, John. Internet Governance. The new frontier of global institutions.  New 
York, NY: Routledge, 2009. 

McMillan, Robert. “A Chinese ISP Momentarily Hijacks the Internet.” PCWorld, 8 April 
2010. 

Mills, Elinor. “Study: Cybercrime cost firms $1 trillion globally.” CNET News, 28 
January 2009. 

Mueller, Milton. “Dancing the Quango: ICANN and the Privatization of International 
Governance.” In Conference on New technologies and International 
Governance. School of Advanced International Studies, Johns Hopkins 
University, Washington, DC, 11-12 February 2002. 

———. Ruling the Root: Internet Governance and the Taming of Cyberspace, .  
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press 2002. 

US Executive Office of the President. National Security Presidential Directive 54: 
Cyber Security and Monitoring (NSPD-54) / Homeland Security Presidential 
Directive 23: Cyber Security and Monitoring (HSPD-23).  

Naughton, John. A Brief History of the Future. The Origins of the Internet.  London: 
Phoenix, 1999. 



Alexander Klimburg and Philipp Mirtl 

WP 65: Cyberspace and Governance—A Primer 

30 

Netcraft. “August 2011 Web Server Survey.”  
http://news.netcraft.com/archives/2011/08/05/august-2011-web-server-survey-
3.html. 

NewScientist. “Exploring the exploding Internet.”  
http://www.newscientist.com/gallery/mg20227061900-exploring-the-exploding-
internet/5. 

Nye, Joseph S. The Future of Power.  New York: PublicAffairs, 2011. 

OECD. “Working Party on Telecommunication and Information Services Policies. 
Internet Infrastructure Indicators (DSTI/ICCP/TISP(98)7/FINAL).” Paris 1998. 

Parfitt, Tom. “Georgian woman cuts off web access to whole of Armenia.” The 
Guardian, 6 April 2011. 

Potter, Evan H., ed. Cyber-Diplomacy: Managing Foreign Policy in the Twenty-First 
Century. Quebec: McGill-Queen’s University Press, 2002. 

Public Safety and Homeland Security Bureau. “Tech Topic 20: Cyber Security and 
Communications.” FCC, 
http://transition.fcc.gov/pshs/techtopics/techtopics20.html. 

Reed, Thomas C. At the Abyss: An Insider’s History of the Cold War.  New York: 
Random House Publishing Group, 2004. 

Reidenberg, Joel R. “Governing Networks and Rule-Making in Cyberspace.” In 
Borders in Cyberspace: Information Policy and the Global Information 
Infrastructure, edited by Brian Kahin and Charles Nesson. 84-105. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press, 1997. 

Samson, Victoria. “The Murky Waters of the White House’s Cybersecurity Plan.” 
Center for Defense Information, 23 July 2008. 

Seib, Philip. Real-Time Diplomacy. Politics and Power in the Social Media Era.  New 
York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2012. 

Shannon, Victoria. “What’s in an ‘i’? Internet governance.” New York Times, 3 
December 2006. 

Thill, Scott. “March 17, 1948: William Gibson, Father of Cyberspace.” Wired, 17 
March 2009. 

UNSTATS. “UN Millennium Development Goals Indicators. The official United 
Nations site for the MDG Indicators.”  
http://unstats.un.org/unsd/mdg/Metadata.aspx?IndicatorId=0&SeriesId=608. 

US Cyber Consequences Unit. “Overview by the US-CCU of the Cyber Campaign 
Against Georgia in August of 2008.” US-CCU Special Report, August 2009. 

W3C. “A Little History of the World Wide Web. From 1945-1995.”  
http://www.w3.org/History.html. 

———. “W3C Glossary/Dictionary.”  http://www.w3.org/2003/glossary/alpha/D/80. 

———. “World Wide Web.”  http://www.w3.org/History/19921103-
hypertext/hypertext/WWW/TheProject.html. 

Walton, Marsha. “Web reaches new milestone: 100 million sites.” CNN.com, 1 
November 2006. 



Alexander Klimburg and Philipp Mirtl 

WP 65: Cyberspace and Governance—A Primer 

31 

WGIG. Background Report.  Geneva: WGIG, 2005. 
http://www.wgig.org/docs/BackgroundReport.doc. 

———. “Report from the Working Group on Internet Governance (WSIS-II/PC-
3/DOC/05).” Geneva: ITU, 2005. 

White House. “The Comprehensive National Cybersecurity Initiative.” Washington, 
DC: White House, 2008. 

———. “Cyberspace Policy Review. Assuring a Trusted and Resilient Information 
and Communications Infrastructure.” Washington, DC: White House, 2009. 

———. “The National Strategy to Secure Cyberspace.” Washington, DC: White 
House, 2003. 

World Bank. “World Development Indicators 2011.”  
http://databank.worldbank.org/ddp/home.do?Step=12&id=4&CNO=2. 

World Telecommunication Standardization Assembly. “Resolution 69 – Non-
discriminatory access and use of Internet resources.” Johannesburg: ITU-T, 
2008. 

WSIS. “Geneva Declaration of Principles (WSIS-03/GENEVA/DOC/0004).” Geneva: 
ITU, 2003. 

———. “Tunis Agenda for the Information Society (WSIS-05/TUNIS/DOC/6(Rev. 1)-
E).” Tunis: ITU, 2005. 

Zeenews. “US, China, Russia have ‘cyber weapons’: McAfee.” Zeenews.com, 18 
November 2009. 

 

 

  



Alexander Klimburg and Philipp Mirtl 

WP 65: Cyberspace and Governance—A Primer 

32 

 

Berggasse 7 
A-1090 Wien 
 
info@oiip.ac.at. 
www.oiip.ac.at 
 
Tel. +43/(0)1/581 11 06 
Fax. +43/(0)1/581 11 10 

Aktuelle Publikationen des oiip 
(ab 2009 bis Herbst 2012, Gesamtübersicht: www.oiip.ac.at) 
 
Die Publikationen des oiip sind das Ergebnis individueller oder kollektiver Arbeiten, die das 
Forschungsprogramm des Institutes in fachlicher und allgemeinverständlicher Form ergän-
zen. Für die in den Schriften zum Ausdruck gebrachten Meinungen sind die jeweiligen Ver-
fasserInnen verantwortlich. 
 
 

 
Buchpublikationen in diversen internationalen Verlagen 
Zu beziehen über den Fachbuchhandel. 
 
ADD ON. 2011. Jahrbuch oiip. Wiener Beiträge zur Internationalen Politik Yearbook oiip. Viennese 
Contributions to International Affairs. Hrsg. v. Katrin Alas, Cengiz Günay und Jan Pospisil. Fac-
ultas.wuv, Wien 2012. 

 
Obama and the Bomb. The Vision of a World Free of Nuclear Weapons. Ed. by Heinz Gärtner, Reihe 
Internationale Sicherheit, Peter Lang - Internationaler Verlag der Wissenschaften, 2011. 
 
Heinz Gärtner, USA - Weltmacht auf neuen Wegen. LIT-Verlag Wien – Zürich 2010. 
 
Nico Prucha, Die Stimme des Dschihad. "Sawt al-gihad": al-Qaidas erstes Online-Magazin.  
Verlag Kovac, Juni 2010. 
 
John Bunzl, Farid Hafez (Hrsg.), Islamophobie in Österreich, StudienVerlag, 2009. 
 
Jan Pospisil, Die Entwicklung von Sicherheit. Entwicklungspolitische Programme der USA und 
Deutschlands im Grenzbereich zur Sicherheitspolitik, Reihe Global Studies, transcript Verlag, Bielefeld 
2009. 
 
Heinz Gärtner, Obama – Weltmacht auf neuen Wegen, 2. veränderte Auflage, LIT Verlag, Wien 2009. 
 
oiip – Arbeitspapiere 
Eigenverlag, zu beziehen über das oiip: www.oiip.ac.at 
 
AP 65  Alexander Klimburg/Philipp Mirtl, „Cyberspace and Governance—A Primer“, September 2012. 
 
AP 64 Hakan Akbulut, Heinz Gärtner, Daphne Warlamis u.a., „Nuklear-radiologische Proliferation: 

Gefährdungspotential und Präventionsmöglichkeiten für Österreich.“ Dezember 2011.  
 
AP 63 Paul Luif, “Challenges for Integrated Peacekeeping Operations.” Dezember 2010. 
 
AP 62 Stefan Khittel und Jan Pospisil, „Früherkennung von bewaffneten Konflikten? Ein Vergleich 

standardisierter Konfliktanalyseverfahren“, April 2010. 
 
AP 61 Paul Luif, „Strategien kleinerer europäischer Staaten in der Technologiepolitik als Antwort auf 

die Herausforderung durch China und Indien“: Die Entwicklung von Strategien in Finnland, 



Alexander Klimburg and Philipp Mirtl 

WP 65: Cyberspace and Governance—A Primer 

33 

Schweden, der Schweiz und den Niederlanden, mit einem Anhang zur F & E – Politik der Eu-
ropäischen Union, September 2009. 

 
AP 60 Hakan Akbulut, Die zivil-militärischen Beziehungen in der Türkei: zwischen Putschbestrebun-

gen und Demokratisierungsbemühungen, September 2009. 
 
 
 
 
 
oiip – Policy Paper und Kurzanalysen 
zu beziehen über das oiip: www.oiip.ac.at 
 
Heinz Gärtner, Die NATO nach dem Gipfel in Chicago 2012, Kurzanalyse, Juni 7/2012. 
 
Vedran Dzihic, Serbien nach den Wahlen – Neue Konstellation, gleiche Problemlagen, Kurzanalyse, 

Juni 6/2012. 
 
Hakan Akbulut, Von der Vormundschaft zur Normalisierung in den zivil-militärischen Beziehungen in 

der Türkei, Kurzanalyse, Mai 5/2012. 
 
Gerhard Mangott: Putin 2.012, Kurzanalyse, März 4/2012. 
 
Cengiz Günay, Ägypten – von der Revolution zur islamischen Demokratie?, Kurzanalyse, März 

3/2012. 
 
Heinz Gärtner, Deterrence and Disarmament, Kurzanalyse, März 2/2012. 

 
Jan Pospisil, Eiskalte Interdependenzen: Der Südsudan radikalisiert seine politische Neuorientierung 

an der Erdölfront, Kurzanalyse, Februar 1/2012. 
 
Gerhard Mangott, Ämtertausch und kontrollierte Wahlniederlage. Russland an der Schwelle zu neuer 

Instabilität, Policy Paper, Dezember 2011. 
 
Tobias Lang und Cengiz Günay: Regionale Auswirkungen der Entwicklungen in Syrien am Beispiel 

des Libanon, Kurzanalyse, November 2011. 
 
Bernardo Mariani,Starting to Build? China’s Role in UN Peacekeeping Operations, Policy Paper, No-

vember 2011. 
 
Melanie Pichler, Sustainable Palm-Based Agrofuels? Current Strategies and Problems to Guarantee 

Sustainability for Agrofuels within the EU, Policy Paper, November 2011. 
 
Hakan Akbulut, Der Zypernkonflikt und seine Auswirkungen auf die EU-Ambitionen der Türkei, Kurz-

analyse, Oktober 2011. 
 
Heinz Gärtner, Die österreichische Sicherheitsstrategie (ÖSS) im globalen Kontext, Kurzanalyse, Ok-

tober 2011. 
 
Daniela Härtl, Kolumbien zwischen Gewalt und Hoffnung. Analytische Betrachtungen und Eindrücke 

vor Ort. Report, September 2011. 
 
Cengiz Günay and Maria Janik, Egypt in Transition – Ready for Democracy?, Current Analysis, Sep-

tember 2011. 
 
Alexander Klimburg and Philipp Mirtl, Cyberspace and Governance—A primer, Special Issue, Sep-

tember 2011. 
 
Heinz Gärtner, The Responsibility to Protect (R2P) and Libya, Kurzanalyse, Juli 2011. 
 



Alexander Klimburg and Philipp Mirtl 

WP 65: Cyberspace and Governance—A Primer 

34 

Gerhard Mangott, Putin 2.0. Russland vor den Präsidentenwahlen 2012. Kurzanalyse, Juli 2011. 
 
John Bunzl, Die Umwälzungen in der arabischen Welt und der Palästinakonflikt, Kurzanalyse, Juni 

2011. 
 
Heinz Gärtner, A Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone in the Middle East, Kurzanalyse, April 2011. 
 
Nico Prucha, Eyeballing Libya – al-Qa’ida’s New Foothold?, Policy Paper, April 2011. 
 
Henriette Riegler, Kroatien: Demonstrationen mit ungewissen Folgen, Kurzanalyse, April 2011. 
 
Gerhard Mangott, Nordafrika und die Rohölversorgung der Europäischen Union, Kurzanalyse, März 

2011. 
 
Cengiz Günay, Transformationen in der arabischen Welt Kontinuität versus Wandel und Folgen für die 

Region, Kurzanalyse, März 2011. 
 
Cengiz Günay, This was Mubarak’s Egypt, Hintergrundinformationen, Februar 2011. 
 
Cengiz Günay, Ägypten – Der Zweite Dominostein? Kurzanalyse, Januar 2011. 
 
Jan Pospisil, Visionen, Realitäten und Risken eines unabhängigen Südsudan: Implikationen des Refe-

rendums vom Jänner 2011. Kurzanalyse, Januar 2011. 
 
Paul Luif, Die „neue“ Gemeinsame Außen- und Sicherheitspolitik der Europäischen Union: Was hat 

Lissabon gebracht? Kurzanalyse, Dezember 2010. 
 
Heinz Gärtner, IAEA: Y. Amano´s first year as Director General. Kurzanalyse, November 2010. 
 
Otmar Höll, Sudan – Mögliche österreichische Beiträge zur gesellschaftlichen Entwicklung. Policy 

Paper, September 2010. 
 
Heinz Gärtner, NATO zwischen Tradition und Modernisierung. Stellungnahme zum Bericht „NATO 

2020: Assured Security; Dynamic Engagement. Analysis and recommendations of the group of 
experts on a new strategic concept for NATO,” 17 May 2010. Kurzanalyse, Oktober 2010. 

 
John Bunzl, Frieden oder Friedensprozess? Zum Treffen von Netanyahu, Abbas und Obama in 

Washington. Kurzanalyse, September 2010. 
 
Heinz Gärtner, Die Bedeutung von internationalem Engagement der österreichischen Sicherheitskräfte 

für Österreich. Kurzanalyse, Juli 2010. 
 
Markus Schwarz-Herda, Die Präsidentschaftswahlen in Kolumbien. Kurzanalyse, Juli 2010. 
 
Henriette Riegler, Kroatien: Ivo Josipović´ erste hundert Tage. Ein Präsident zeigt sein Profil. Kurzana-

lyse, Juni 2010. 
 
Heinz Gärtner, Kann sich Österreich im Mittleren Osten erneut engagieren? Zur Schaffung einer nuk-

learfreien Zone in dieser Region. Kurzanalyse, Juni 2010. 
 
Heinz Gärtner, Obamas neue Strategie: Abkehr von Bush. Stellungnahme zur „National Security 

Strategy,“ President of the United States. Kurzanalyse,  Juni 2010. 
 
Heinz Gärtner, Amerika und Europa: transatlantische Beziehungen oder globale Verantwortung? Poli-

cy Paper, April 2010. 
 
Heinz Gärtner, Disarmament – Non-Proliferation – Deterrence. Policy Paper, März 2010. 
 
Heinz Gärtner, Nonproliferation and Engagement:Iran and North Korea should not let the opportunity 

slip by. A comment on the actual state of affairs. Kurzanalyse, November 2009. 



Alexander Klimburg and Philipp Mirtl 

WP 65: Cyberspace and Governance—A Primer 

35 

 
Heinz Gärtner, Die Ereignisse im Iran, die USA und das iranische Nuklearprogramm. Kurzanalyse, 

Juni 2009. 
 
Stefan Lehne, Resolving Kosovo’s Status. Policy Paper, Juni 2009. 
 
John Bunzl und Cengiz Günay, Obama: A New Beginning? Kurzanalyse, Juni 2009. 
 
Heinz Gärtner, Apropos NATO: Was verändert sich mit Obama? Kurzanalyse, Juni 2009. 
 
Cengiz Günay, Die Türkei : Der Besuch von Präsident Obama. Hintergrund, Auswirkungen, die au-

ßenpolitische Rolle der Türkei und ihr Verhältnis zur EU. Kurzanalyse, Mai 2009. 

 
Working Paper in Progress 
Alexander Klimburg, Ruling the Domain: (Self) Regulation and the Security of the Internet, paper in-
formally distributed at the 11th Meeting of the ICANN Studienkreis, 28./29. April 2011, Hilton Buda-
pest. 

Wien, Österreichisches Institut für Internationale Politik – oiip, 2012 

 


